Source-PDF: D:\Review\Paper\Clinical prediction bridge (your current query, improved)\clinical imaging diagnosis with quantumhybrid\A quantum-optimized approach for breast cancer detection using SqueezeNet-SVM.pdf
Relative-Path: Paper\Clinical prediction bridge (your current query, improved)\clinical imaging diagnosis with quantumhybrid\A quantum-optimized approach for breast cancer detection using SqueezeNet-SVM.pdf
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A quantum-optimized approach 
for breast cancer detection using 
SqueezeNet-SVM
Anas Bilal1,2, Ali Alkhathlan3, Faris A. Kateb4, Alishba Tahir5, Muhammad Shafiq6 & 
Haixia Long1,2
Breast cancer is one of the most aggressive types of cancer, and its early diagnosis is crucial for 
reducing mortality rates and ensuring timely treatment. Computer-aided diagnosis systems provide 
automated mammography image processing, interpretation, and grading. However, since the 
currently existing methods suffer from such issues as overfitting, lack of adaptability, and dependence 
on massive annotated datasets, the present work introduces a hybrid approach to enhance breast 
cancer classification accuracy. The proposed Q-BGWO-SQSVM approach utilizes an improved quantum-
inspired binary Grey Wolf Optimizer and combines it with SqueezeNet and Support Vector Machines 
to exhibit sophisticated performance. SqueezeNet’s fire modules and complex bypass mechanisms 
extract distinct features from mammography images. Then, these features are optimized by the 
Q-BGWO for determining the best SVM parameters. Since the current CAD system is more reliable, 
accurate, and sensitive, its application is advantageous for healthcare. The proposed Q-BGWO-
SQSVM was evaluated using diverse databases: MIAS, INbreast, DDSM, and CBIS-DDSM, analyzing 
its performance regarding accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, precision, F1 score, and MCC. Notably, 
on the CBIS-DDSM dataset, the Q-BGWO-SQSVM achieved remarkable results at 99% accuracy, 
98% sensitivity, and 100% specificity in 15-fold cross-validation. Finally, it can be observed that the 
performance of the designed Q-BGWO-SQSVM model is excellent, and its potential realization in other 
datasets and imaging conditions is promising. The novel Q-BGWO-SQSVM model outperforms the 
state-of-the-art classification methods and offers accurate and reliable early breast cancer detection, 
which is essential for further healthcare development.
Keywords  Quantum computing, Breast cancer, Support vector machine, Grey wolf optimization, Medical 
image analysis
Cancer is a significant contributor to death globally, especially in the United States, and presents a considerable 
challenge to increasing life expectancy1. According to the World Health Organization’s 2019 statistics, cancer 
is the primary or secondary cause of death in 112 out of 183 nations and the third or fourth cause in an 
additional 23 countries2. In 2020, the International Agency for Research on Cancer (GLOBOCAN) estimated 
that there were around 19.3 million new cases of cancer and 10.0 million deaths caused by cancer. Out of all the 
cases, there were almost 2.3 million new instances of female breast cancer, which is the most often diagnosed 
malignancy, exceeding lung cancer. However, lung cancer continued to be the leading cause of cancer-related 
mortality, resulting in almost 1.8 million deaths globally. Cancer is defined by the accelerated and unregulated 
proliferation of cells, which disseminate throughout the body and infiltrate tissues. Tumors are formed as a result 
of unregulated cell proliferation3. Normal cells undergo division to facilitate tissue repair and are ultimately 
eliminated from the body.
In contrast, malignant cells exhibit aberrant proliferation, infiltrating healthy tissues and inducing genetic 
mutations4. Tumors may be categorized into two distinct types: benign and malignant. Benign tumors are 
characterized by their inability to metastasize and are non-malignant. However, they might develop into masses 
1College of Information Science and Technology, Hainan Normal University, Haikou 571158, China. 2Key Laboratory 
of Data Science and Smart Education, Ministry of Education, Hainan Normal University, Haikou 571158, China. 
3Department of Computer Science, Faculty of Computing and Information Technology, King AbdulAziz University, 
Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. 4Department of Information Technology, Faculty of Computing and Information Technology, 
King AbdulAziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. 5Shifa College of Medicine, Shifa Tamere Milat University, 
Islamabad, Pakistan. 6School of Information Engineering, Qujing Normal University, Yunnan, China. email: 
myresearch_hainnu@163.com
OPEN
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:3254 
1
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-86671-y
www.nature.com/scientificreports

due to excessive cell proliferation. On the other hand, malignant tumors are carcinogenic and can infiltrate 
nearby tissues and metastasize to different areas of the body. Female breast cancer is the most common kind 
of cancer among numerous types, such as lung, liver, colorectal, stomach, and breast cancer (BC)5. On a global 
scale, around 12.5% of adult women will get a breast cancer diagnosis at some stage throughout their lives. In 
breast cancer, the illness may arise in several areas of the breast, such as the ducts, lobules, or the surrounding 
tissues, as seen in Fig. 1, which presents the anatomical structure of the breast.
BC is a major worldwide health issue, causing 10 million fatalities and 19.3 million new cases in 2020 alone. 
This disorder arises from genetic abnormalities that lead to aberrant cell growth, leading to non-cancerous or 
cancerous tumors. Breast cancer is the second most prevalent form of cancer worldwide and the fifth highest 
cause of mortality among women. Mammography has been crucial in the timely identification of breast cancer, 
leading to a considerable decrease in death rates. This is achieved by capturing breast images from two angles: 
Medio lateral oblique and craniocaudally. This technique classifies breast density into four categories: adipose, 
dispersed, heterogeneously dense, and very dense7,8. Tumors exhibit a range of forms and borders, with malignant 
tumors often displaying irregular and unclear boundaries, whereas benign tumors are frequently compact and 
well-defined. Calcifications exhibit various characteristics; non-cancerous calcifications usually manifest as 
sizable rods or popcorn-shaped structures, while cancerous ones are spread out or grouped9. Multiple factors 
contribute to the formation of breast cancer. Figure 2 depicts the variables that impact the occurrence of breast 
cancer, while Table 1 provides a summary of the many phases involved in the progression of breast cancer. This 
illness may readily propagate via a woman’s thoracic region, glands, and lactiferous ducts.
Early detection and diagnosis of breast cancer greatly enhance survival rates and decrease the occurrence 
of false positive results, which refer to cases when patients are mistakenly identified as cancer-free. Several 
diagnostic techniques are used to detect breast cancer, such as mammography, CT scans that utilize X-rays, 
MRI, and ultrasound, which use magnetic energy and sound waves. Mammography is often the first stage in 
the identification of breast cancer. However, it may provide difficulties in detecting cancer in women with thick 
breast tissue; moreover, the radiation released during mammography hazards both radiologists and patients. 
Similarly, CT scans use radiation that can potentially induce genetic abnormalities in tissues. Ultrasound is the 
ideal modality for women with thick breast tissue; nevertheless, its reliability is not always consistent, and it is 
linked to a significantly elevated percentage of false positive results. In order to tackle these issues, biopsies are 
performed. A biopsy involves a thorough physical examination followed by the extraction of a tissue sample for 
microscopic analysis. Subsequently, a pathologist examines and analyses this specimen. Histopathology is the 
meticulous examination of biological cells and tissues using a microscope.
However, the manual inspection of samples by a pathologist is a time-consuming and laborious process, 
requiring high skills and knowledge. It may result in possible errors related to mental fatigue. For decades, 
computer-aided detection has been one of the leading systems for diagnosing cancer, successfully overcoming 
some associated challenges. When it comes to breast cancer examination, ordinary X-ray pictures are applied to 
Fig. 1.  Anatomy of breast6.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:3254 
2
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-86671-y
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

distinguish and classify samples of tissues as malignant or benign11. Time-consuming manual examination and 
classification of breast lesions in mammography rely on the competence and experience of radiologists, which, 
in turn, may lead to possible errors in diagnosing. The large number of images causes the radiologists’ workload 
and the rates of mistakes to grow. Recently, some computer-aided detection systems have been developed to 
improve the degree of accuracy and alleviate the work of radiologists in this field. The computer-aided detection 
system automatically sorts out regions of interest in mammograms and then classifies them. However, they 
still have not solved challenges, including the variability in shape and intensity and the problem of overlapping 
appearance of tissues in mammograms.
The proposed study introduces a novel method for classifying breast cancer that combines an improved 
Quantum-Inspired Binary Grey Wolf Optimizer (Q-BGWO) with a SqueezeNet Support Vector Machine 
(SQSVM), offering significant advancements over existing approaches. Unlike traditional methods, which often 
face challenges such as overfitting, limited adaptability to high-dimensional data, and reliance on extensively 
annotated datasets, this approach integrates quantum computing principles into nature-inspired optimization, 
addressing these limitations effectively. By combining the Q-BGWO’s optimization capabilities with SqueezeNet’s 
efficient feature extraction and SVM’s robust classification, this work establishes a new standard in breast cancer 
diagnostics.
The novelty of this work lies in its unique hybrid framework, where quantum computational principles such 
as quantum rotation gates and probabilistic adjustments enhance the search space exploration and convergence 
speed of the Grey Wolf Optimizer. This advancement allows the model to optimize SVM hyperparameters 
precisely, ensuring higher classification accuracy and robustness across diverse datasets. Unlike existing nature-
inspired algorithms, the Q-BGWO-SQSVM achieves superior accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity performance, 
outperforming state-of-the-art models across various benchmarks. Additionally, the inclusion of SqueezeNet’s 
lightweight architecture ensures computational efficiency without compromising diagnostic precision, making 
it suitable for real-time clinical applications.
Following the analysis and description of quantum computing and its cooperation with nature-inspired 
algorithms, the study takes critical steps to use the design and mechanisms of the Grey Wolf Optimizer, 
which represents the strategic behaviors of various organisms in nature to optimize their means of solving 
complex problems. These behaviors primarily aim to overcome difficulties related to specific survival tasks. The 
integration of quantum computational capacities enables the optimizer to refine its operation by incorporating 
quantum characteristics, such as superposition and probabilistic adjustments, to address the challenges faced 
by traditional methods. Tools such as Grover’s and Shor’s brief factorization algorithms are applied, concretely 
improving the speed of search and calculation. The study effectively extends the application of classical heuristics 
Level
Statement
Size
Recommended treatment
1
Non-invasive cancer
Small
Simple mastectomy or breast-conserving surgery
2
Invasive
2 cm or below
Radiation therapy, surgery
3
Invasive
2–5 cm
Target drugs, immunotherapy, chemotherapy, hormone therapy
4
Invasive
Above 5 cm
Chemotherapy, immunotherapy, hormone therapy
5
Invasive
Any size
Chemotherapy, immunotherapy, hormone therapy
Table 1.  The stages of development of breast cancer.
 
Fig. 2.  Factors affecting Breast cancer disease10.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:3254 
3
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-86671-y
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

to resolving significant engineering and computing tasks through a combination with quantum improvements. 
This innovative approach not only advances the field of medical image classification but also sets a new 
benchmark for automated detection of breast cancer, making it a transformative tool in clinical diagnostics.
The innovative contributions of the study include:
•	 Developing a novel hybrid framework that combines the Q-BGWO with SqueezeNet-SVM significantly ad
vances the capabilities of automated breast cancer detection systems.
•	 Integrating quantum-inspired optimization principles into the Grey Wolf Optimizer enhances its ability to 
handle high-dimensional, complex data and avoids premature convergence common in traditional meta
heuristic algorithms.
•	 An efficient feature extraction mechanism using SqueezeNet’s fire modules and bypass mechanisms, ensuring 
computational efficiency while retaining diagnostic precision.
•	 State-of-the-art performance metrics, as demonstrated on diverse datasets such as MIAS, INbreast, DDSM, 
and CBIS-DDSM, achieve outperformance over existing models in accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity.
•	 A practical and scalable solution for clinical diagnostics, reducing reliance on large annotated datasets while 
maintaining high accuracy and robustness.
Key contributions of the study are:
•	 The study addressed issues concerning the external diagnosis of breast cancer through the careful dissection 
of resource/manual tracking as insufficient for the verification of such matters. Subsequently, a system based 
on computer vision tools and artificial intelligence for the automated diagnosis of issues, such as the detection 
of the individual modality, was founded.
•	 The study has developed a novel method for classifying breast cancer by integrating a Q-BGWO and a 
SQSVM. The proposed strategy contributes to improving accuracy at the point of search application.
•	 In the first phase of this study, a computer vision algorithm based on pixel-wise segmentation was imple
mented to accurately extract regions of architectural distortion regions of interest from digital mammogram 
images.
•	 In the next phase, the SqueezeNet algorithm was used to automatically extract features of the abovementioned 
ROIs and classify them as malignant or benign. Therefore, an optimized support vector machine was used to 
classify the same effectively, resulting in a comprehensive diagnostic tool.
•	 This novel method has been tested with different datasets, such as MIAS, INbreast, DDSM, and CBIS-DDSM, 
and greatly improved performance metrics can distinguish the results from existing ones. Notably, the Q-BG
WO-SQSVM achieved 99% accuracy, 98% sensitivity, and 100% specificity on the CBIS-DDSM dataset, set
ting a new benchmark for automated breast cancer detection.
•	 Achieved outperformance over existing models, delivering higher accuracy and specificity while maintaining 
sensitivity, thus providing a reliable and efficient tool for early breast cancer detection.
The paper is organized as follows: Sect. “Preliminaries” presents a comprehensive introduction to machine 
learning algorithms, quantum computing (QC), and nature-inspired algorithms, which serve as the foundation 
for the subsequent sections. Sect. “Related work” examines a literature review. Sects. “Material and methods” 
and “Experimental results” discuss the suggested approach and provide the findings from the experiments. Sect. 
“Conclusions” serves as the final part of the report, concisely summarizing the key insights and conclusions 
derived from the research.
Preliminaries
Support vector machine (SVM)
SVM aims to identify an N-dimensional hyperplane that classifies the data vectors with minimal error. SVM 
uses convex quadratic programming to avoid local minima12. Considering a binary classification problem with a 
training dataset containing class labels: (x1, y1)). . . n, yn)) xi ∈ Rd and y1 ∈ (− 1, + 1), xi represents the feature 
vector, and yi represents the class label; the optimal hyperplane can be described as follows:
	
wxT + b = 0
(1)
W, x, and b represent the weight, input vector, and bias, respectively. The parameters www and b must satisfy the 
following conditions:
	
wxT
i + b ≥+1ifyi = 1
(2)
	
wxT
i + b ≤−1ifyi = −1
(3)
The primary objective in training an SVM model is to identify values for w and b that maximize the margin 
1
||w||2 . Challenges often arise with problems that are not linearly separable. To address this, the input space is 
transformed into a higher-dimensional space, making the problem linearly manageable.
Kernel functions13 are used to increase the dimensionality of the data, making the issue easier to solve linearly. 
Kernel functions also make it possible to calculate more efficiently in spaces of higher dimensions. For example, 
a linear kernel might compute the dot product of two sets of features in this numerical feature space. Radial 
Basis Function and polynomial are two popular SVM kernels. The following is an explanation of these kernels.
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:3254 
4
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-86671-y
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

	
K (xi, xj) = e−r||xi,xj||2
(4)
	
K (xi, xj) = (1 + xT
i xj)
p
(5)
Parameters such as γ and p are significant in the given SVM framework. In particular, while γ denotes the width 
of the Gaussian kernel, p is the order of the polynomial. According to the outcomes of prior studies, properly 
configuring these model parameters considerably enhances the accuracy of SVM classification14. Thus, it is 
essential to gradually fine-tune such significant parameters as C and γ and the selection of the SVM Gaussian 
kernel function. In turn, such adjustments contribute to increasing the input space’s dimensionality to allow 
non-linear issues to be construed as linear.
Quantum computing
In quantum computing, the equivalent of a bit is a qubit, which can exist in a superposition of 0 and 1 states. 
In other words, a qubit |φ〉 can be equal to |0〉 and |1〉 at the same time, with specific probabilities of such 
states. Most importantly, the superposition principle is ensured since a qubit |φ〉 can be represented as a linear 
combination of |0〉 and |1〉 states. At the same time, |0〉 is the ground state of a qubit, while |1〉 is the excited one 
they could be compared to the two binary states of a conventional bit. Therefore, the probability of measuring |0〉 
or |1〉 is associated with their coefficients and can be calculated by squaring them within the linear combination 
after normalizing these states. The normalization condition establishes that the sum of the squared probabilities 
of any particle is always 1; thereby, the probability conservation is provided. Thus, qubits are used to develop 
quantum algorithms and help achieve exponentially faster calculations of such activities as factoring large 
numbers or scanning unsorted databases15. The mathematical qubit is expressed as:
	
|φ⟩= x|0⟩+ y|1⟩
(6)
where and are complex numbers that satisfy the normalization condition x|2 +|y|2 = 1. In this case, |x|2 and |y|2 
are the probabilities of finding the qubit as a |0〉 and |1〉 state. Quantum operations on the qubits are mostly done 
through quantum gates or operators, representing such operators as matrices. Thus, operators enable qubit state 
manipulation, allowing for the move from one state to another. The primary quantum operators are the Pauli 
operators: P, X, Y, and Z, as shown in Table 2. Examples of complex gates include Toffoli, Feynman, Fredkin, 
Swap, and Peres gates that perform vital roles in quantum circuits. Rotation gates such as x-gate, y-gate, and 
z-gate rotate qubits along the X, Y, or Z axes, and their transformations in matrices form is Mathematically 
shown16.
Equations 7, 8 introduced in the article show how rotation gates are applied to change the update phases of 
GWO. To continue the development of algorithms that are influenced by quantum theories, this study also 
applies the principles of quantum rotation matrices to traditional algorithms. This approach remains novel, 
and this is the first time quantum mechanics and nature-inspired algorithms have been applied to analyze the 
outcomes of the interaction and integration of the two discussed approaches in feature selection.
	
xgate(θ) =
( cos (θ)
−isin (θ)
sin (θ)
cos (θ)
)

(7)
	
ygate(θ) =
( cos (θ)
−sin (θ)
sin (θ)
cos (θ)
)

(8)
	
zgate(θ) (θ) =
(
e−(iθ)
0
0
e(iθ)
)

(9)
Binary grey wolf optimization
The recent improvements have stimulated the considerable growth of nature-inspired algorithms in many 
technical domains. The Artificial Bee Colony is the approach developed by Derviş Karaboa that is based on 
the foraging behavior of honeybees to solve numerical optimization problems. Another solution is the Grey 
Gate name
Matrix
I-gate
[
1
0
0
1
]
X-gate
[
0
1
1
0
]
Y-gate
[
0
−i
i
0
]
Z-gate
[
1
0
0
−1
]
Table 2.  Q-Gates along with respective matrices.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:3254 
5
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-86671-y
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

Wolf Optimizer introduced by Seyed Mirjalili17. The latter approach employs the hunting strategies of wolves to 
improve the found solutions. Meanwhile, the Elephant Search Algorithm relies on the unique search behaviors 
of male and female groups of elephants. The Artificial Algae Algorithm18 is an innovative platform that leverages 
the evolutionary processes of microalgae. The Fish Swarm Algorithm19 has also been developed based on how 
fish schools forage. The GWO algorithm was conducted by Mirjalili et al. in 201417. It exploits the search power 
of grey wolves with a complex social organization. According to the process, the GWO algorithm involves three 
best solutions during each iteration. In this case, α, β, and δ start leading and moving the pack to promising areas. 
The latter is assisted by so-called omegas who participate in exploring and optimizing the search landscape. 
This well-organized structure allows investigating the search surface and the identification all possible optimal 
results. The structure of this process is depicted in Fig. 3.
The encirclement behavior of Grey Wolves (GW) can be analytically described using the equations below:
	
⇀
K =

⇀
C ∗
⇀
Xp. (t) −
⇀
X (t)

⇀
X (t + 1) =
⇀
Xp. (t) −
⇀
A ∗−→
K

(10)
In these equations, t denotes the current iteration, 
⇀
Xprey Is the positional vector of the prey, 
⇀
X represents 
the positional vector of the GW, 
⇀
A linearly decreases from 2 to 0, and 
⇀r 1, 
⇀r 2 are random vectors uniformly 
distributed within the range [0,1]. These equations are crucial in modeling the foraging tactics of grey wolves, 
as illustrated in Fig. 4.
Figure 5 presents the Binary Grey Wolf Optimizer (BGWO) as a flowchart. In the BGWO algorithm, each 
Grey Wolf possesses a flag vector, the length of which matches that of the dataset. The positions of the Grey 
Wolves are updated according to Eqs. (10).
	
ﬂag i,j =
{
1Xi,j > 0.5
0
otherwise 
(11)
where Xi,j Designates the ith GW’s jth position.
Related work
Recent advancements have highlighted the potential of expert systems and artificial intelligence in aiding the 
detection of breast cancer, helping medical professionals avoid costly errors. These systems efficiently process 
medical data and critically support less experienced doctors. Breast cancer detection has seen notable successes 
through various artificial intelligence strategies, including21 GWO-based feature selection combined with 
deep learning for microarray cancer datasets22 ensemble models for predicting breast cancer relapse from 
histopathological images23 hybrid optimization techniques like Binary Grey Wolf with Jaya Optimizer for 
biomarker selection 24 fog-empowered transfer learning frameworks such as CanDiag for cancer diagnosis25 
chaotic firefly algorithms for global optimization with dropout regularization26 GA-based hierarchical feature 
selection for handwritten word recognition27 hybrid firefly algorithms for XGBoost tuning in intrusion 
detection28 improved sine cosine metaheuristics for IoT security using hybrid machine learning models and29 
metaheuristic-tuned extreme learning machines tackling IoT security challenges30.
Fig. 3.  Hierarchy of the grey wolves(GW)17.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:3254 
6
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-86671-y
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

These innovative methods collectively underline the effectiveness of hybrid and metaheuristic approaches 
in improving diagnostic accuracy and addressing complex challenges in medical and security domains. Despite 
their success, these approaches often face limitations such as dependency on large datasets, lack of adaptability 
across varied imaging conditions, and challenges in achieving consistent optimization of hyperparameters in 
high-dimensional data.
The AMMLP method has recorded an impressive accuracy of 99.26%31. Diagnoses have achieved peak and 
average accuracies of 100% and 96.87% using an RS-SVM classifier32. A PSO-SVM approach has yielded a 
99.3% accuracy rate33. A genetically optimized neural network (GONN) specifically designed for breast cancer 
detection has used a genetic approach to enhance its structure, resulting in an astounding accuracy rate of 
97.73%34. In addition, using genetic algorithms for feature selection has effectively identified the most efficient 
characteristics of breast cancer for SVM classification, leading to a 95.8% accuracy35. Advanced applications 
of genetic algorithms have improved breast cancer prediction. These include a genetic algorithm based on 
tribal competition and an online gradient-boosting strategy for feature selection. These methods have achieved 
accuracies of 98.32, 94.28, and 95.75% respectively36–38. In addition, a differential-evolution algorithm with 
multi-objective elitism and a skill acquisition technique based on graphs achieved accuracies of 96.86 and 75.05%, 
respectively, as reported in references33. Ensemble learning algorithms have also been applied, achieving a 97.4% 
accuracy rate41. An adjusted bat algorithm has optimized SVM parameters significantly, improving classifier 
accuracy to 96.49% from 96.31% for the WDBC dataset42. A feature selection strategy using GA reached a 96.9% 
accuracy43. Comparisons among different cancer classification models like naïve Bayes, logistic regression, and 
decision tree identified the logistic regression classifier as the most effective, with the highest accuracy of 97.9%44. 
Particle swarm optimization has been utilized to refine the C4.5 algorithm, improving its accuracy to 96.49% 
from 95.61% for the WBC dataset45. An improved cost-sensitive SVM, considering the unequal misclassification 
costs of breast cancer diagnosis, achieved a 98.83% accuracy on the WDBC dataset46. Additional techniques, 
such as the sparse pseudoinverse incremental-ELM, likelihood-based fuzzy analysis, and a dual-stage SVM-
driven BC classification, have achieved accuracies of 95.26, 97.28, and 98% correspondingly47–49. In addition, 
preprocessing methods such as resampling, discretization, and handling missing data have been used. This 
has resulted in classifications using Sequential-Minimal-Optimization, naïve Bayes, and J48 algorithms, with 
claimed average accuracies of 97.5, 98.73, and 98% respectively47.
While these approaches have made significant strides, their dependence on traditional optimization methods 
and general machine learning frameworks limits their ability to achieve high performance consistently across 
diverse imaging datasets. These methods cannot often balance computational efficiency with the complexity of 
medical imaging data.
The combination of Support Vector Machine (SVM) with Radial Basis Function (RBF) kernel and AdaBoost 
algorithm classifiers, using nature-inspired algorithms and applying the maximum likelihood principle, has 
improved the stability of classification. The accuracy rates achieved are 96% for AdaBoost, 97.37% for Particle 
Swarm Optimisation (PSO), 97.19% for Genetic Algorithm (GA), and 95.96% for Ant Colony Optimisation 
(ACO), as determined through tenfold cross-validation50,51. Furthermore, the integration of Support Vector 
Machines (SVM) with K-means clustering has successfully distinguished between cancerous and non-cancerous 
tumours, with an impressive accuracy rate of 97.38%52. PSO has been successfully applied to the MIAS, WDBC, 
Fig.4.  Grey wolves go through many distinct phases in their hunting activity. The first phase ‘A involves the 
wolf’s pursuit, approach, and tracking of its prey. When the wolves have located their prey, they will begin 
harassing and pursuing it in stage B-D. At this point, the pack may form a circle around the victim to keep it 
from running away. The last step E is to assault the prey while the wolves remain positioned20.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:3254 
7
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-86671-y
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

and WBCD datasets, as reported in datasets53. A study comparing six machine learning approaches achieved a 
99.04% accuracy rate54. Augmented by the Levy flying strategy, the fruit fly optimization technique successfully 
optimized the Support Vector Machine (SVM) parameters and yielded significant outcomes in breast cancer 
diagnostics55. A novel approach has been proposed56, which combines Support Vector Machines (SVM) with 
Radial Basis Function (RBF) and polynomial kernel functions, together with the use of the dragonfly method. 
Two machine learning methods, a decision tree and K-nearest neighbors, were used to build models. These 
models were trained on data that underwent feature selection using principal component analysis (PCA). The 
results showed that the K-nearest neighbors classifier performed better than the decision tree57.
Building on these advancements, this study introduces a novel hybrid approach, the Quantum-Optimized 
Binary Grey Wolf Optimizer-SqueezeNet Support Vector Machine (Q-BGWO-SQSVM), which addresses 
these limitations by combining the strengths of quantum-inspired optimization with efficient deep learning 
Fig. 5.  The framework of the proposed methodology.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:3254 
8
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-86671-y
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

architectures. Unlike traditional approaches, Q-BGWO-SQSVM leverages quantum mechanics principles for 
superior hyperparameter optimization, enhancing feature selection and classification accuracy across diverse 
datasets.
Furthermore, genetic programming and machine learning techniques have resulted in a classification 
accuracy of 98.24%58. Researchers have developed optimization algorithms for categorizing the Iris and Breast 
Cancer datasets using Artificial Neural Networks (ANN), showing notable results59. The efficacy of several 
machine learning models in forecasting breast cancer was assessed using the WDBC dataset. The Support Vector 
Machine (SVM) model achieved a precision of 96.25%60. In addition, a novel diagnostic model that integrates 
the batting approach, gravitational search algorithm, and a feed-forward neural network achieved testing and 
training accuracies of 94.28% and 92.10%, respectively, on the same dataset61.
The unique contribution of Q-BGWO-SQSVM lies in its ability to overcome challenges such as high-
dimensional data complexity, overfitting, and dataset variability. By integrating SqueezeNet’s efficient feature 
extraction with Q-BGWO’s robust optimization capabilities, the proposed model achieves state-of-the-art 
performance and ensures computational efficiency and adaptability to clinical applications.
A hybrid metaheuristic-swarm-intelligence-based SVM classifier, optimized using grey wolf and whale 
optimization methods, was evaluated on the WDBC dataset. The classifier achieved a classification accuracy 
of 97.721%62. Recent studies using the grey wolf optimizer have improved the performance of support vector 
machines (SVM) in diagnosing breast cancer. These studies have shown that the optimizer achieves rapid 
convergence and a high accuracy rate of 99.30%63. Efficient scaling solutions for optimizing Support Vector 
Machines (SVM) are successful for linear programming, as evidenced by references64–67. A novel parallel swarm 
approach has been created to address two-sided balancing issues.
Additionally, techniques have been devised to minimize computation time and solution area in conventional 
processes. These advancements have resulted in notable enhancements in efficiency and accuracy, as shown in 
previous studies68,69. Metaheuristic algorithms, including ABC, FPA, BA, PSO, and MFO, have optimized SVMs 
and extreme learning machines, successfully tackling problems related to local minima and overfitting70,71. 
Numerous research papers have explored a variety of ML algorithms for diagnosing breast cancer, particularly in 
datasets affected by impulsive noise. A multilayer extreme learning machine method based on full correntropy 
has been highlighted for its effectiveness72. Efforts to boost ANN performance while simultaneously cutting 
down on misclassification costs have been encapsulated in the LS-SOED method73. Moreover, logistic regression 
has been used to select features, in combination with the Data Handling Group Method and a smooth group 
L1/2 regularisation approach. This strategy seeks to remove unnecessary nodes from the inputs of feedforward 
neural networks, leading to substantial improvements in accuracy and precision74,75.
A fuzzy inference system that leverages an adaptive network and decision tree methodologies has shown 
considerable classification accuracies76. Recent advancements in hybrid ML models utilize diverse meta-
heuristic optimization techniques, including BBO, GWO, PSO, SCA, ChOA, SSA, WOA, AGPSO, and DA, to 
solve a broad spectrum of problems. Despite the No Free Lunch theorem suggesting no single metaheuristic 
algorithm universally outperforms others, specific algorithms have demonstrated greater efficacy for particular 
applications.
The proposed study seeks to determine how the Q-BGWO-SQSVM architecture categorizes mammographic 
pictures in the MIAS, Inbreat, DDSM, and CBIS-DDSM datasets. Here, the fundamental image processing 
methods are meant to eliminate background noise, consequently making the pictures more vivid and defined. 
Secondly, benign and malignant areas of interest are gathered. For Abnormal, the included aberrations presented 
in datasets along with their central coordinates indicate, simplify the process of taking square regions that 
perfectly fit the circumstances. Since Normal is not provided with specific spatial coordinates, the region of 
the place mentioned before is randomly picked77. These representative samples of both normality and deviancy 
are relatively distinct. However, their malignant and benign simulated Region of Interest are not easily 
distinguishable. Therefore, it can be suggested that to make the ‘discernable patterns’ more distinct from the two 
buckets—normal and abnormal categories BGWO and Q-BGWO could be applied as separate models.
Moreover, the combination of BGWO and Q-BGWO, using the SQSVM, is supposed to give a highly 
accurate classifier that can tell the difference between malignant and benign breast cancer. This algorithm aimed 
to automate breast cancer classification, which promises high precision. Figure 5 reflects the entire schematic of 
our study.
Material and methods
Dataset
This study evaluates the effectiveness of proposed algorithms by utilizing mammography images from four 
benchmark datasets: Mammographic Image Analysis Society (MIAS)78, INbreast79, Digital Database for 
Screening Mammography (DDSM)80, and Curated Breast Imaging Subset of DDSM (CBIS-DDSM)81. Figure 6 
displays examples of normal and malignant mammograms from these datasets.
Rationale for Dataset Selection: These datasets were selected to ensure a comprehensive evaluation of the 
Q-BGWO-SQSVM model across varied imaging conditions, including differences in resolution, imaging 
formats, lesion characteristics, and annotation precision.
•	 MIAS represents a compact dataset offering annotated mammograms with diverse lesion types and associated 
prognostic data, making it suitable for validating the model’s ability to handle small-scale, annotated datasets.
•	 INbreast provides high-resolution images in DICOM format, incorporating expert-annotated benign and 
malignant lesions, which test the model’s capability to process high-dimensional medical data.
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:3254 
9
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-86671-y
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

•	 DDSM contributes a large dataset of mammograms with detailed patient-specific information, enabling the 
evaluation of the model’s generalization on extensive datasets with variable patient demographics and density 
ratings.
•	 CBIS-DDSM is an improved version of DDSM, offering binary masks and pixel-level annotations, which 
allow for precise validation of the model’s feature extraction and classification accuracy.
Fig. 6.  Breast mammogram images from the datasets.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:3254 
10
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-86671-y
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

The MIAS dataset78 comprises 322 mammograms from 161 individuals, including 54 malignant, 61 benign, and 
207 normal images. Each image, rendered in 1024 × 1024 pixel grayscale, offers a resolution of 200 microns and 
is stored in PGM format. This dataset includes diverse mammogram stances and detailed annotations. It features 
various lesion types and related pathological prognostic data. The dataset also details the ROI, cropped based on 
the provided coordinates for each anomaly’s center and radius. Only the benign (BIRADS 2, 3) and malignant 
(BIRADS 4, 5, 6) annotations are considered for this research.
The INbreast dataset79 contains 410 mammography images, incorporating benign, malignant, and normal 
cases. This collection, saved in DICOM format, includes 192 benign and 107 malignant breast lesions, each 
delineated with expert precision. Image dimensions range from 2560 × 3328 to 3328 × 4084 pixels, adjusted 
according to breast size.
The DDSM dataset80, contributed to by institutions like Massachusetts General Hospital and Wake Forest 
University School of Medicine, includes comprehensive mammography data from 2500 benign and 3000 
malignant cases. Each record in this dataset provides detailed patient-specific information such as age, ACR 
breast density rating, and subtlety assessment of anomalies. The ground truth data in the DDSM offers detailed 
descriptions of lesion locations and types at the pixel level, with 200 ROIs associated with both benign and 
malignant images.
The CBIS-DDSM81, an improved version of the DDSM curated by the University of Florida, provides a public 
repository of mammography images in DICOM format. This dataset includes 3,568 mammograms, showcasing 
1740 benign and 1828 malignant cases. Each image offers dual views (MLO and CC) and is accompanied by 
binary mask pictures that delineate the anomalies for precise ROI identification, allowing for exact pixel-level 
analysis of the irregular areas.
Image preprocessing
Breast lesions within the breast tissue present a high risk of misdiagnosis9. These lesions are typically recognized 
by their shape, size, and boundary characteristics, and they appear lighter than the surrounding tissue82. This 
study’s preprocessing steps include noise reduction using adaptive median filtering, morphological operations 
for boundary refinement, and Contrast Limited Adaptive Histogram Equalization (CLAHE) to enhance image 
clarity. Parameters for noise reduction include a window size of 3 × 3 for initial filtering, which expands to 7 × 7 
if outliers persist. Morphological operations, specifically erosion and dilation, use a 3 × 3 structuring element 
to remove non-breast regions while preserving critical features effectively. To monitor the development of 
significant lesions, radiologists often compare mammograms of the same breast taken over time. Identifying 
suspicious lesions over time involves spotting key control points like the edges of shapes caused by tissues, 
arteries, and ducts and analyzing the connections involving these points in sequential images. Adapting deep 
learning techniques to analyze such complex environments is crucial in medical image processing. Preprocessing 
of images is crucial to increase the contrast between normal and pathological images in mammograms by 
reducing the noise and improving the image clarity. Such preprocessing includes noise reduction, enhancements, 
scaling, and cropping of images, which is essential before implementing a learning-based algorithm to avoid 
overfitting. This paper does image enhancements such as averaging, median filtering, morphological operations, 
and CLAHE to increase the readability of mammogram images.
The region between the breast area is identified, affecting the adjacent tissue, using the global thresholding 
method. Probably, this refers to the application of a threshold value T on the mammography image I(x, y), and 
the pixels with values greater than the threshold value are considered to be a breast and the other a non-breast, 
where I(x, y) > T represent the breast region. As an experienced radiologist, the threshold level here is about 30.
Image acquisition
Compiling a vast assortment of mammography pictures presents substantial logistical challenges. Mammograms 
in their original state often include patient information, inherent interference, and fluctuations in illumination, 
which might result in a greater occurrence of incorrect positive results. Typically, these photos are transformed to 
grayscale in order to preserve important information throughout other modifications. The inherent limitations 
of mammography may have a negative impact on the effectiveness and education of deep learning algorithms. 
Moreover, a lack of breast photos sometimes results in overfitting during model training. Deep learning systems 
need a large number of annotated mammograms, but the task of annotating these pictures is both time-
consuming and expensive83.
During data acquisition, morphological operations such as opening and closing eliminate labels and 
annotation tags. Erosion and dilation, fundamental morphological techniques, reduce and enlarge the elements 
of an image, respectively. Erosion is defined as the compilation of all points P such that the structuring element 
S fits within the set E when translated by P:
	
EθS = {P | (S) P ⊆E}
(12)
Dilation involves expanding E with the structuring element S, organizing all displacements P so that SSS and 
EEE intersect at least once:
	
E ⊕S = {P | ()P ∩E 6 = ϕ}
(13)
These operations are crucial for preserving image features:
	
E ◦S = (EθS) ⊕S
(14)
	
E • S = (E ⊕S)θS
(15)
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:3254 
11
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-86671-y
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

Equations 17, 18 remove labeling and annotation markers from mammography images.
Image Noise Reduction and contrast enhancement
Post-acquisition, mammography images undergo processing to remove noise. Various noise types such as 
Gaussian, salt and pepper, speckle, and Poisson are reduced using an adaptive median filtering technique, 
resulting in a noise-free image Inf. The process begins by determining the maximum and minimum pixel 
intensities within a window, denoted as MaxP ω and MinP ω, respectively. If the median Medω If the window 
is not an outlier, the process moves to the next verification step; otherwise, the window size is increased until 
the median is not an outlier or the maximum window size is reached. If Inf falls within the range MinP ω< Inf< 
MaxP ω, the image resolution remains unchanged; if not, the median value from step 2 is used.
Following noise reduction, image contrast enhancement is necessary as boundaries in noise-free 
mammography may fade. Edge-stopping functions prevent diffusion in areas of low image gradient, preserving 
sharp edges and enhancing detail. The edge-stopping function and the diffusion constant K are given by:
	
Eds (f) = exp
(
1
αK2 × (
1 −s2))

(16)
This function also helps maintain the object’s edges while reducing noise. Histogram equalization is applied 
to boost global contrast, particularly enhancing relative contrast values crucial for imaging data. A histogram 
represents the distribution of digital image pixels across grey levels:
	
P (gl) = Pxn
Ptn × Es(f)
(17)
This equation demonstrates anisotropic diffusion histogram equalization, estimating the likelihood of each grey 
level gl within the image.
Data-augmentation
CAD systems are capable of detecting and categorizing breast lesions. However, they frequently face high 
false-positive rates84. Conventional techniques that depend on traits created by humans are not sufficient for 
the precise identification of abnormalities85. The limited availability of annotated pictures for deep learning 
models results in overfitting86 and difficulties in training owing to the significant expense and time needed for 
human annotation87. Previous methodologies had trouble handling the data’s intricacy88. Figure 7 illustrates 
the suggested method for enhancing the detection and classification of breast cancer. This work utilizes data-
augmentation methods such as geometric adjustments and patch extraction to enhance picture datasets, 
as shown in Table 3. Each augmentation technique was applied sequentially with the following parameters: 
sharpening intensity ranged from 0.5 to 2, Gaussian blur was applied with variances of 0.25, 0.5, 1, and 2, and 
rotations were set at intervals of 45° (e.g., 45°, 90°, 135°, and 180°). Skewing was performed in four directions: 
left, right, forward, and backward, with offsets of 10 pixels. Shearing transformations were limited to ± 10° along 
the X-axis and Y-axis. Flip transformations included left–right and top–bottom inversions to maximize dataset 
Fig. 7.  Data augmentation.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:3254 
12
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-86671-y
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

variance. Patch extraction involved splitting images into non-overlapping tiles of 256 × 256 pixels to improve 
spatial diversity during training.
Lesion segmentation
Breast segmentation is critical in mammography analysis because it removes artifacts, pectoral muscles, and 
background noise that could hinder anomaly detection. This process divides the mammogram into regions of 
interest (ROIs) for more effective feature extraction from breast anomalies. However, inaccurate segmentation 
can lead to poor feature selection, subsequently causing errors in classification. The segmentation of breast masses 
is typically performed based on attributes like intensity, texture, shape, and presence of anomalies. A method 
was introduced89 to classify lesions by these characteristics since clinically precise mass boundaries are often 
unattainable. Another study90 applied a thresholding technique to enhance edge detection in mammograms, 
identifying the Otsu method as the most effective for mammogram segmentation. Threshold segmentation is 
the prevalent method for isolating breast lesions; it categorizes lesion pixels based on a set threshold value. This 
approach is convenient for images exhibiting diverse grayscale levels. Due to its simplicity, rapid computation, 
and ease of implementation, threshold segmentation is a fundamental preliminary step before extracting image 
features and conducting further analysis. This research utilized the Otsu thresholding model91 to delineate 
potential mass areas within mammograms. The Otsu method primarily utilizes the intensity data of the image, 
disregarding its shape and geometric properties, which facilitates the segmentation of the relevant regions for 
detailed pixel-level investigation. The method effectively binarizes the image by splitting its pixels into the object 
(foreground) and backdrop (background) based on the optimal threshold set by the adopted thresholding 
technique, as depicted in Fig. 8. This study set thresholds when performing segmentation on an image. The 
purpose is to divide pixels according to different thresholds to obtain several sets of pixels. Each set may provide 
information about the image’s specific structure or texture, and each region’s pixels share the same features while 
those of neighboring regions varied. The algorithm’s precise process is as follows:
Fig. 8.  Segmentation results.
 
Sr
Augmenting approaches
Invariance features
1
Sharpen
0.5, 1, 1.5, 2
3
Gaussian blur
0.25, 0.5, 1, 2
4
Rotation
45◦, 90◦, 135◦, 180◦
5
Skew
Left, Right, Forward, Backward,
6
Flipping
Left side, Right side, Top, Bottom,
7
Shear
X-axis 10◦ and Y-axis 10◦
Table 3.  Several methods for enhancing mammography by including invariance properties.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:3254 
13
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-86671-y
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

•	 The Otsu technique needs the threshold T to divide a mammogram with a grey value range of 298 [0, 1 − L] 
into two halves, C1 and C2, with C1 corresponding to the grey value range [0, T] and C2 corresponding to the 
grey value range [T + 1, L − 1].
•	 Calculate the pixel average grey values µ1 and µ2 for areas C1 and C2, as well as their respective proportions 
ω1 and ω2 to the whole image pixel, and then calculate the grey average value µr for the entire image pixel 
described in Eq. 18.
	
µr = ω1µ1 + ω2µ2
(18)
•	 Compute the total variance σ2
r of regions C1 and C2, described in Eq. 19.
	
σ2
r = ω1(µ1 −µr)2 + ω2(µ2 −µr)2 = ω1ω2(µ1 −µ2)2
(19)
T takes on consecutive values between [0, 1 − L]; hence, the value of σ2
r fluctuates continually. Larger the value 
of σ2
r, the greater the contrast between the foreground and background. The calculation stops when σ2
r reaches 
its maximum value. Suppose T0 is the threshold that corresponds to the highest variance. In that case, this 
threshold is the optimal segmentation threshold because it effectively distinguishes the foreground from the 
background and has the lowest misclassification probability.
Quantum-inspired binary grey wolf optimization
While the conventional GWO uses continuous values in the [0,1] range to guide the wolves’ positions, the 
BGWO transforms each wolf’s position into a binary format using a sigmoid function on the former92. To solve 
the unit commitment challenge, a BGWO version referring to the quantum approaches was launched and called 
Q-BGWO. The novel approach takes advantage of the quantum-inspired mechanism by which each wolf’s 
position is binary and affected by a specific qubit vector that was combined with a quantum rotation gate. This 
transformation is made possible owing to an adjustment specified with the help of the y-gate (θ) in Equation. 
The new solution is fundamentally different from the conventional GWO because while the latter adjusts wolves’ 
positions following Equations A and C, the quantum approach makes the required adjustments based on the 
relevant qubit and the rotation angle θ that can be calculated with the help of two random probabilistic values, 
γ and ζ.
	
(θ)α (t + 1) = (ζ)α(γ)α
∑(
⇀
X
)
α
. (t) −
(
⇀
X
)
.(t)).2π
(20)
	
(θ)β (t + 1) = (ζ)β(γ)β
∑(
⇀
X
)
β
. (t) −
(
⇀
X
)
.(t)).2π
(21)
	
(θ)δ (t + 1) = (ζ)δ(γ)δ
∑(
⇀
X
)
δ
. (t) −
(
⇀
X
)
.(t)).2π
(22)
	
(ζ)α = (λ)1 .π
(23)
	
(ζ)β = (λ)2 .π
(24)
	
(ζ)δ = (λ)3.π
(25)
The α, β, and δ wolves are allocated random coefficients λ1, λ2, and λ3, respectively. The theta magnitude for 
the α wolf is represented by ζα. These coefficients determine the rotation angles for each wolf’s qubit vector, 
designated as Q. The rotations are performed based on Eqs. (26), (27), and (28), which specify the adjustments 
made to the location of each wolf following their respective rotation degrees.
	
(Q)α (t + 1) = (R)α.((θ)α. (t + 1)).(Q)α(t)
(26)
	
(Q)β (t + 1) = (R)β.((θ)β. (t + 1)).(Q)β(t)
(27)
	
(Q)δ (t + 1) = (R)δ.((θ)δ. (t + 1)).(Q)δ(t)
(28)
Q is a quantum state vector that forms a single qubit.
	
(Q)α⟩= (x)α
 0⟩+ (y)α|1⟩
(29)
	
(Q)β⟩= (x)β
 0⟩+ (y)β|1⟩
(30)
	
(Q)δ⟩= (x)δ
 0⟩+ (y)δ|1⟩
(31)
Initially, the coordinates (x)α, (y)α, (x)β, (y)β, (x)δ, and (y)δ are all set to 0.5. Updates to the wolves’ positions 
are then governed by the likelihood of their corresponding qubit vectors being in the state |1〉. This method 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:3254 
14
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-86671-y
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

aligns with the quantum behavior of the system, where each position change reflects the quantum probability 
calculations.
	
(X)α (t + 1) = (X)α (t) .(y2
α)(t + 1)
(32)
	
(X)β (t + 1) = (X)β (t) .(y2
β)(t + 1)
(33)
	
(X)δ (t + 1) = (X)δ (t) .(y2
δ)(t + 1)
(34)
The binary conversion of the wolves’ positions in the BGWO involves straightforward thresholding operations. 
The position update equation is represented as:
	
(
⇀
X
)
α
. (t + 1) =



1
if
(
⇀
X
)
α
. (t + 1) ≥y2
α(t + 1)
0
otherwise

(35)
The following process converts probabilistic values into binary outcomes. The process compares each value with 
a threshold, which is squared. The threshold is derived from the probability of the qubit being in the state. After 
thresholding, a binary value of each feature is determined by a majority voting process between the alpha (α), 
beta (β), and delta (δ) wolves. The feature is chosen if most of these wolves assign a value of ‘1’ to it. Otherwise, 
the feature is rejected. Thus, a binary feature vector 
(
⇀
X
)
 is created in order to represent the chosen features 
that are essential for solving the problem. The binary feature vector 
(
⇀
X
)
, is then passed on through another 
process which involves finding the sigmoid function:
	
sigm (p) =
1
1 + e(−p) 
(36)
where p ranges from 0 to 1. This function helps soften the thresholding process, providing a smoother transition 
between binary states.
The resultant values are then compared to a randomized threshold s, ranging from 0 to 1, to finalize the binary 
states of the features:
	
(
⇀
X
)
=







1F
(
⇀
X
)
≥s
0F
(
⇀
X
)
< s
This step is crucial for ensuring that the feature selection process is robust and aligns with the probabilistic 
nature of quantum-inspired computations.
Pseudo Code: Quantum Binary Grey Wolf Optimization (QBGWO)
Input:
`N`—Total number of wolves (Population size)
`D`—Dimensions of the search space
`T`—Maximum number of iterations
`f`–Fitness evaluation function
Output:
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:3254 
15
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-86671-y
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

`α`—Optimal solution discovered
Procedure:
1. Initialize Population:
Create population `ρ` with `N` wolves, each with a D-dimensional binary vector
For each wolf `F_i` in `ρ`:
For each dimension `d` from 1 to `D`:
`F_i[d] = GenerateBinary()`
2. Assign Roles:
Order wolves by their fitness using `f`
Designate roles: α (Alpha), β (Beta), δ (Delta), ω (Omega) based on fitness order
3. Initialize Qubits:
For each wolf `F_i` in `ρ`:
Initialize a qubit vector `Q_i` with values `|0⟩` and `|1⟩` having equal probabilities
4. Update Positions Using Quantum Gates:
For iterations `t` from 1 to `T`:
Adjust control parameter `a`:
`a = 2 * (1—t / T)`
For each wolf `F_i` in `ρ`:
For top roles `F_p` in {α, β, δ}:
Set vectors `A` and `C`:
`A = 2 * a * GenerateVector()—a`
`C = 2 * GenerateVector()`
Compute distance `K` from `F_p` to `F_i`:
`K =|C * position of F_p at t—position of F_i at t|`
Update position for the next iteration:
`F_i[t + 1] = position of F_p at t—A * K`
Update qubit vector `Q_i` using rotation gates:
For each dimension `d` from 1 to `D`:
Apply rotation gate `R(θ)` to `Q_i[d]`
Update `Q_i[d]` based on the new angle `θ`
Use a sigmoid function for binary transitions:
For each dimension `d` from 1 to `D`:
`probability = Sigmoid((Q_α[d] + Q_β[d] + Q_δ[d]) / 3)`
`F_i[d][t + 1] = 1 if GenerateRandom() < probability else 0`Reassess fitness and readjust roles:
For each wolf `F_i` in `ρ`:
Update α, β, δ based on new fitness evaluations
5. Finalize:
Return the α with the best fitness
 
SqueezeNet- SVM
SqueezeNet93 was selected as the foundational architecture for this study due to its compact size and low number 
of parameters, making it highly efficient for training on limited computational resources. SqueezeNet operates 
with significantly fewer parameters than larger models: AlexNet has 61 million, VGG-16 features 138 million, 
Inception-v3 holds 23 million, ResNet-50 has 25 million, and MobileNet comprises 4.2 million parameters. In 
contrast, SqueezeNet has only 1.2 million, enabling it to efficiently handle large datasets, such as mammography 
images, which require substantial computational power due to their high resolution and complexity. Additionally, 
its architecture is particularly effective in detecting subtle patterns, such as those found in breast cancer features. 
This streamlined architecture does not compromise on performance, maintaining comparable accuracy to its 
larger counterparts in image classification tasks94.
The fire module is the centremost part of a SqueezeNet, which is a small and flat convolutional network. As 
illustrated in Fig. 9, its purpose is to analyze the information to be retained efficiently. Specifically, it performs 
compression to reduce the number of input channels and expand to develop them. This mechanism plays a 
crucial role in processing mammography images by efficiently reducing redundant data while emphasizing 
critical features that are indicative of breast cancer. As the corresponding source describes, the compression 
feature reductions rely on 1 × 1 convolution, and the expansion development comes with both 1 × 1 and 3 × 3 
convolutions. In this way, the channel count is increased with 1 × 1 and 3 × 3 convolutions, which means bypass 
links can capture the finer details and changes in the input. Otherwise, very little useful information can be 
gained from it.
In addition, the SqueezeNet is equipped with sophisticated bypass links designed to improve the transmission 
of information across the network, as indicated in Fig. 10. These bypass mechanisms allow for improved retention 
and transmission of intricate details found in mammography images, ensuring that fine-grained patterns 
relevant to breast cancer detection are preserved throughout the layers. Specifically, these links allow for direct 
data transport to profiles from one level of detail to another, bypassing many layers. The corresponding bypass 
links can be defined in the following way: Let X be an input feature map and F be the corresponding transform 
form. The traditional bypass link can be formally expressed as y = x + F(x), x is the output of such a bypass 
link, while the operator “+” signifies that the two profiles are combined element-wise. In this way, any bypass 
link’s input and output can be combined to provide the same fundamental details to the upgraded profile—
including the differences. This property is critical for mammography, where subtle variations between normal 
and abnormal tissues are essential for accurate classification. Finally, SqueezeNet allows efficient and effective 
feature retention functions thanks to the Fire Module and several bypass link parameters. These unique design 
elements make SqueezeNet particularly suited for extracting distinct features from mammography images, as 
it balances computational efficiency with the ability to detect subtle patterns characteristic of breast cancer. In 
turn, the SGS model can identify fine-grained patterns and improve the accuracy and reliability of normal path 
charge detection.
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:3254 
16
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-86671-y
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

This study seeks to classify the pictures from breast cancer datasets. The images will be trained to characterize 
the traits generated by SqueezeNet. The Support Vector Machine is one of the most popular binary classifiers and 
is well known for its maximum precision of linear and non-linear classification issues. Additionally, it might be 
pretty efficient in multi-class conditions. The fundamental principle used in applying Support Vector Machines 
is to create one or more hyperplanes in the input space that might identify multiple classes appropriately. The 
linear determination hyperplane is expressed as: where w is the weight vector, b is the bias, wT denotes the 
transpose of the weight vector x is the input vector that contains the parameters of an input feature. The prime 
purpose of the classification duties in SVM is to choose the perfect hyperplane so that the data points lead the 
class. It should also enhance the capacity for separation.
The margin is the gap between the nearest data points and the hyperplanes for all classes. It was noted that 
a larger margin indicates that newer data points have less impact on a classifier. There is no real variance due to 
details as the points are defined as optimal separation95. Thus, SVMs work to minimize the margin exactly and 
to ensure good classification between class and data transition. Optimal changes in the value of w and b normally 
do this.
	
{
minw,b 1
2wtw + C ∑n
i=1 σi
subjecttoyi
(
wtxi + b)
≥1 −σi 
(37)
The input vector is denoted as xi, and the corresponding output label is denoted as yi.
Fig. 10.  SqueezeNet with complex bypass.
 
Fig. 9.  Fire module structure.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:3254 
17
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-86671-y
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

In Support Vector Machines, σi Is the slack variable, allowing certain training samples to be mishandled 
to a limited extent. It includes the C parameter that measures the weight assigned to punishing inappropriate 
classification. It also supports finding the best balance between incorporating the highest margin within two 
classes and the ability to classify each of the training samples appropriately. It serves to give the penalty value for 
misclassification. The variable n is the number of all training samples. 1
2wT w is the first component of the target 
function, and its role is to maximize the margin, while the second one, C ∑n
i=1 βiσi, is responsible for handling 
the punishment value for the misclassified training samples. The Lagrangian dealing with this optimisation task 
can be presented in the following manner:
	
L (w, b, σ, β) = 1
2wtw + C
n
∑
i=1
σi −
n
∑
i=1
ai
[
yi
(
wtxi + b)
−1 + σi
]
−
n
∑
i=1
βiσi
(38)
In order to find optimal values for w, b, and ζ in an SVM formulation by Lagrange multipliers α = (α1,…, αn) 
and β = (β1,…, βn) have to set up and solve a system of equations by taking partial derivatives of Lagrangian L 
concerning these variables and setting them to zero, this calculative process can be described in the following 
way:
	
w =
n
∑
i=1
αiyixi
(39)
The dual Lagrangian may be obtained by using the Karush–Kuhn–Tucker condition49:
	
{
maxaL (a) = ∑n
i=1 αi −1
2
∑n
i=1
∑n
j=1 αiajyiyjxT
i xj
Subjectto ∑n
i=1 αiyi = 0

(40)
In non-linear SVM, kernel functions transform input data into a higher-dimensional space, enabling the 
algorithm to identify a separating hyperplane in this new space, even if the data cannot be separated linearly 
in the original space. The optimization issue in non-linear SVM is similar to that of linear SVM, but it involves 
using a kernel function. The optimization problem may be expressed as follows:
	
{
maxaL (a) = ∑n
i=1 αi −1
2
∑n
i=1
∑n
j=1 αiajyiyjG(xixj)
Subjectto ∑n
i=1 αiyi = 0, 0 < ai < C

(41)
G(xi, xj) represents the kernel function in this context. Among the most commonly utilized kernel functions is 
the Gaussian kernel:
	
Ggau (xi, xj) = exp
(
||xi −xj||2
2φ2
)

(42)
φ is a hyperparameter that regulates the level of smoothness in the decision boundary. A polynomial kernel is a 
function used in machine learning and support vector machines. It is a mathematical function that calculates the 
similarity between two data points in a higher-dimensional space:
	
Gpol (xi, xj) = (xT
i + h)
d
(43)
d represents the degree of the polynomial. The symbol “h” represents a variable that determines the extent of the 
polynomial expansion.
SQSVM- optimization
It is crucial to discretely optimize the SVM parameters for optimal performance of SVM classifiers, particularly 
in complex image classification tasks. The optimization process is based on Grey Wolf Optimizer, which is 
a metaheuristic algorithm based on the social hierarchy and hunting behavior of Grey Wolves. The process 
involves several step-by-step results, which are very technical, to ensure the efficiency of the SVM operation.
First, the initialization step involves the creation of a randomly organized population of Grey Wolves—where 
each Grey Wolf is indicative of a specific array containing a 2-dimensional representation of a particular SVM 
parameter. This array contains the penalty factor, C, which is the most significant SVM parameter to optimize, 
and kernel parameters, when applicable, present critical information to the working of the classifier, which is 
conserved within the dimension. A separate step is applied to define the respective operational parameters 
of the Quantum-enhanced Binary Grey Wolf Optimizer (Q-BGWO), the improved version of the Grey Wolf 
Optimizer incorporating principles of quantum mechanics. The Q-BGWO introduces quantum behaviors, 
such as superposition and probabilistic adjustments, allowing the optimizer to explore the search space more 
comprehensively and avoid premature convergence. This approach significantly enhances the algorithm’s ability 
to handle high-dimensional, complex data, such as mammography images in breast cancer classification.
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:3254 
18
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-86671-y
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

The utilization of Q-BGWO in this context is motivated by its ability to balance exploration and exploitation 
during the optimization process effectively. By integrating quantum mechanics principles, such as quantum 
rotation gates and qubit state vectors, Q-BGWO achieves a broader search capacity and faster convergence. This 
ensures the selection of optimal SVM parameters, such as CCC and kernel parameters, with higher accuracy 
and robustness, which is crucial for improving breast cancer classification performance. Compared to traditional 
metaheuristic algorithms, Q-BGWO excels in navigating complex optimization landscapes, reducing the risk of 
local optima, and delivering precise feature optimization.
Next, the respective operational parameters of the Quantum-enhanced Binary Grey Wolf Optimizer are 
comprised of the population size, the number of iterations, and the preannouncement requirement to commence. 
The operational parameters of the SqueezeNet-SVM, which is the SVM model, are initialized. After initialization, 
the fitness function is used to determine the effectiveness of the operation of each configuration based on the 
classification accuracy of the SVM model achieved by the cross-validation test. Cross-validation testing is meant 
to evaluate the ability of the model to generalize, divided into the folds present in K -fold scales of 5, 10, and 
15. This mitigates overfitting and is meant to test the applicability of the SVM on datasets. Correspondingly, 
feature selection operations are optimized by applying the constant q = 1 – e, where q varies from 0, increasing 
to 1 gradually, which controls the exponential decay of the number of features to ensure optimal computational 
efficiency and accuracy. The final configuration of the number of features that participates in the modeling, 
denoted as R, and the total number of features for selecting the data subsets are selected maximally to focus the 
model on the most probable, most informative attributes.
Subsequently, the fitness of the classified operations of each population of Grey Wolves is tested based on 
the SVM classification accuracy on the validation folded datasets. At the end of each iteration, the Grey Wolves 
classification is conducted and evaluated – with the top three best performers ranked as the alpha, beta, and 
delta associated with the most optimal sets. Using this hierarchical ranking to change the dynamic space of all 
the wolves in the population ensures the optimal parameters are identified. The iterative process is continued 
until the optimal parameter configurations are identified or the operation of parameter learning ability on 
the classifier, which can be evaluated, has been completed. The final chosen configurations are applied in the 
SQSVM, and the testing of the operational efficiency of the classifier on the testing set confirms the analytical 
applications in real-time tasks.
Performance evaluation matrices
Various performance metrics typical of many preceding studies are applied to provide a verifiably accurate 
assessment of the Q-BGWO-SQSVM model and theBGWO–SQSVM model. It should be mentioned that 
evaluation of a model’s effectiveness includes testing it not only based on its training scores but also through its 
ability to provide accurate performance on the new data in the future. A set of evaluative indicators is selected to 
assess the performance whenever a new model is developed.
Sensitivity (
TP
TP+FN × 100%)
: is an evaluation of a model’s ability to identify the positive cases of predicting 
a target class attribute or variable in such a way, measuring the model’s ability to recognize all of the positive 
instances.
Specificity (
TP
TP+FN × 100%)
: is defined by. This method is prescript to sensitivity, as it measures a model’s 
ability to identify non-positive or negative instances. The method is applied to assess how much a model’s 
positive and negative predictions are accurate.
Accuracy (
TP+TN
TP+TN+FP+FN × 100%)
—Specified as evaluating the ability to make correct predictions and 
outcomes on both positive and negative instances. The method relies on performance evaluation in terms of 
precision and recall.
Precision (
TP
TP+FP × 100% )
: is defined as being focused on measuring exactness in positive predictions.
F1-Score ( 2×Precision×Recall
Precision+Recall
× 100% )
: Defines a harmonic mean of precision and recall evaluation and is 
useful when a class distribution imbalance is visible. In this way, whenever either precision or recall is strangely 
high and the other—low, the harmonious mean provides a balanced metric that indicates the advantages and 
disadvantages of both methods.
Matthews correlation coefficient 
(
TP×TN−FP×FN
√
(T P +F P )(T P +F N)(T N+F P )(T N+F N) × 100%
)
: is defined by the 
formula. The method is particularly applicable when class sizes are imbalanced and unequal. It offers a balanced 
measure that includes sensitivity, precision, true positives, false positives, and false negatives.
Experimental results
This section presents a detailed examination of the experimental results of studying the datasets utilizing 
mammography data. This research assesses the proposed technique’s effectiveness in the breast tumor 
categorization field.
Implementation details
This study used the MATLAB platform and GPU acceleration to analyze the most efficient classification 
algorithms: the Q-GBGWO based on the SVM. The experimental settings were related to a high-performance 
fusion: the Intel Core i7 13th generation central processing unit, 32 GB RAM, and a robust NVIDIA GeForce 
RTX 3090 Ti graphics processing unit. At the same time, the Q-GBGWO was altered in terms of the SVM 
parameters, which was explained by a higher appropriateness for the classification task.
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:3254 
19
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-86671-y
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

Cross-validation through 5, 10, and 15 folds ensured the model assessment’s reliability using different datasets. 
In this regard, the optimizer, functioning within [0,1] as the initial domain and with a consistent population size 
of 10, can be described as the one dynamically adjusting the SVM’s penalty parameter C for obtaining a coherent 
level of complexity and the trade-off concerns related to the differences in training errors. Various types of 
kernel applications, such as Linear, RBF, Polynomial, and Sigmoid, were applied to provide opportunities for 
both types of data separations, linear and non-linear. Moreover, the weighting parameters, such as α = 0.97 and 
β = 0.03, were tuned for the optimal balance between exploration and exploitation and to increase the algorithm’s 
convergence rates using all the best-fitted conditions specified. The performance was measured by the best-fitted 
optimal iterations varying from 7 to 60 and the corresponding fitness values ranging from 0.0135 to 0.1077—the 
critical pictures of the classifier’s highest precision. Finally, the qubit vector set was created around [0.5, 0.5] for 
α-the wolf to implement the most optimal approach for balanced quantum computing and allow the classifier to 
obtain high classification accuracy as a ready solution with robust specificity problems.
Assessment of Q-GBGWO compared to traditional bio-inspired optimization methods
This research assesses the efficacy of the Quantum Grey Binary Grey Wolf Optimizer (Q-GBGWO) in 
comparison to conventional bio-inspired algorithms such as the Binary Grey Wolf Optimizer (BGWO), Grey 
Wolf Optimizer (GWO), and Particle Swarm Optimisation (PSO). For this comparison, we performed testing 
using the benchmark functions17,96. Every algorithm was executed following the requirements given in their 
respective foundational texts. The findings in Table 4 demonstrate that Q-GBGWO consistently outperforms 
other methods, exhibiting greater performance across numerous tests. Although the specific specifics of how 
each function is carried out align with the processes and results shown in Table 4, Q-GBGWO has demonstrated 
significant efficacy across several benchmarks. While BGWO, GWO, and PSO have shown competence in 
certain activities, Q-GBGWO has exhibited comparable or higher effectiveness in most assessed functions. 
The forthcoming figures, such as Fig. 11, will illustrate the convergence trends of Q-GBGWO. These trends 
will demonstrate the adaptability and effectiveness of Q-GBGWO during both the initial and later phases of 
the iterations. They will emphasize the well-maintained balance between exploration and exploitation in 
optimization.
Cross-validation results
This study used several cross-validation (CV) methods for optimal outcomes and reliable validation. A tenfold 
cross-validation was used due to its continuous delivery of excellent outcomes. The whole dataset was randomly 
partitioned into 10 sections of equal size. Throughout the training phase, nine subsets were used, with the 
final subset designated as the validation set. The technique was repeated 10 times, with each subset utilized for 
validation once, in order to achieve comprehensive validation across all subgroups. Furthermore, for accurate 
validation, we conducted fivefold and 15-fold cross-validation and documented their respective results in Fig. 12.
Function
Q-BGWO
BGWO
GWO
PSO
F1
5.62E − 06
0.169128234
1.183301971
0.603106942
F2
1.24E − 05
10.37589831
3.856437111
0.326454917
F3
30.0342881
3878.161525
156.6945295
300.625596
F4
0.062406547
24.2152155
1.812399255
9.875028467
F5
28.93312121
112.934761
994.4792144
198.3568905
F6
3.941060642
0.628962914
2.099735534
0.020609621
F7
0.003583321
0.142225758
27.40623994
0.128575963
F8
 − 5753.495034
 − 9596.391775
 − 5834.328807
 − 8260.117265
F9
16.55299471
103.5559957
194.1249357
57.74076835
F10
19.96397213
2.590710518
2.874960771
1.488599648
F11
0.03556385
0.345515711
0.157819171
0.6376282
F12
0.308273215
3.61868785
0.050510421
0.295120471
F13
2.807176382
6.174534011
0.301430388
0.230653105
F14
0.998050756
0.998003838
8.840835963
0.998003838
F15
0.001303212
0.000376244
0.000834597
0.001223173
F16
 − 1.031622045
 − 1.031628453
 − 1.031628453
 − 1.031628453
F17
0.400527015
0.397887358
0.397887358
0.397887358
F18
3.000000026
3
3
3
F19
 − 3.854720743
 − 3.862782148
 − 3.862782148
 − 3.862782148
F20
 − 3.090069499
 − 3.321995172
 − 3.321995167
 − 3.20310205
F21
 − 4.979597891
 − 5.055197729
 − 5.100772139
 − 5.10077214
F22
 − 4.991267477
 − 5.128822797
 − 10.40294057
 − 10.40294057
F23
 − 5.101072966
 − 10.53640982
 − 10.53640982
 − 10.53640982
Table 4.  Q-GBGWO Comparative Analysis on Bench-Mark Functions.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:3254 
20
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-86671-y
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

The comparative analysis focusing on the Q-BGWO-SQSVM model across three different cross-validation 
schemes—fivefold, tenfold, and 15-fold—as revealed through the study of diverse medical image datasets such 
as MIAS, INbreast, DDSM, and CBIS-DDSM, highlights its exceptional performance. This proposed model has 
demonstrated top-tier results, consistently outperforming other evaluated models in every key metric: Accuracy 
(ACC), Sensitivity (SEN), Specificity (SPC), Precision, F1 Score, and Matthews Correlation Coefficient (MCC).
The Q-BGWO-SQSVM model achieved the highest values for ACC, SEN, SPC, Precision, F1 Score, and MCC 
and showed remarkable stability and reliability across all datasets and metrics. Its performance underscores its 
suitability for handling intricate medical image analysis tasks, making it an ideal candidate for applications 
requiring high precision and reliability in clinical and diagnostic settings.
Throughout the evaluation process over various cross-validation folds, the Q-BGWO-SQSVM model 
exhibited robustness and adaptability, effectively addressing dataset-specific nuances and maintaining consistent 
performance. This adaptability is crucial for applications in medical image analysis, where varying data 
characteristics can significantly impact the efficacy of machine learning models.
The insights gleaned from this study suggest that the Q-BGWO-SQSVM model holds significant promise for 
enhancing diagnostic accuracy and clinical decision-making in healthcare. Further validation on independent 
datasets and continuous fine-tuning are recommended to fully capitalize on its capabilities and ensure its 
reliability and applicability in real-world medical imaging scenarios. This approach reaffirms the importance 
of advanced machine learning techniques in driving forward the fields of medical diagnostics and personalized 
medicine.
Performance comparison of proposed algorithm with ML models across different cross-
validation schemes
For the MIAS dataset, the 5-Fold Cross-Validation results showcase varying performance levels among different 
models. The Q-BGWO-SQSVM model exhibits the highest performance, achieving an accuracy of 0.97, 
sensitivity of 0.96, and specificity of 0.98. These results underscore its superior capability in effectively diagnosing 
medical images compared to traditional models like SVM and newer variants such as SQSVM and BGWO-
SQSVM, which also perform robustly but do not reach the peak metrics of the Q-BGWO-SQSVM. Expanding 
the analysis to 10-Fold Cross-Validation, there is a noticeable improvement across all models, indicative of the 
increased data utilization enhancing model training and testing robustness. The Q-BGWO-SQSVM continues 
to lead with exemplary metrics, including a near-perfect accuracy of 0.98. This enhancement across the board 
suggests that models can generalize better with more comprehensive cross-validation, with less variance in 
performance due to the increased data exposure during training. With the 15-Fold Cross-Validation, the trends 
observed in the 10-Fold validation continue, with even slight metric increments for models like SVM, SQSVM, 
and BGWO-SQSVM. The Q-BGWO-SQSVM reaches peak performance metrics, maintaining top scores with 
an accuracy of 0.99, reinforcing its robustness and consistency across different validation folds. This highest 
level of validation provides a more stringent test of the models’ abilities to maintain performance, suggesting the 
Q-BGWO-SQSVM’s potential utility in clinical settings where high reliability is paramount.
Fig. 11.  Examination of convergence behaviour for Q-BGWO on standard test functions.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:3254 
21
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-86671-y
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

Across Table 5, the progression from 5-Fold to 15-Fold Cross-Validation demonstrates a general trend of 
increasing performance, highlighting the importance of model training and validation on larger subsets for 
stability and accuracy. The Q-BGWO-SQSVM not only consistently outperforms other models but also shows 
minimal performance degradation as the complexity of the validation scheme increases. This suggests that 
the model’s architecture and underlying algorithms are well-suited for tackling complex patterns in medical 
imaging data, potentially due to superior feature extraction capabilities and optimization strategies that mitigate 
overfitting more effectively than its counterparts. These insights into the model performances on the MIAS 
Fig. 12.  Cross-validation results.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:3254 
22
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-86671-y
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

dataset across varying cross-validation schemes illustrate the significant impact of sophisticated modeling 
techniques and rigorous validation on enhancing diagnostic accuracies in medical image analysis.
In the INbreast dataset under 5-Fold Cross-Validation, the performance metrics vary across models, with 
the Q-BGWO-SQSVM again showing the highest performance, achieving nearly perfect metrics that emphasize 
its robust feature extraction and classification capabilities. This model achieves remarkable accuracy, sensitivity, 
and specificity, demonstrating its effectiveness in handling INbreast’s imaging complexities compared to more 
conventional models such as SVM and RF, which exhibit competitive but slightly lower performance metrics. The 
10-Fold Cross-Validation results for the INbreast dataset indicate improvements in model performance, which 
can be attributed to a more comprehensive utilization of the dataset during the training phase. The Q-BGWO-
SQSVM continues to excel with the highest scores, illustrating its consistent performance and reliability. 
This trend highlights the model’s capacity to effectively leverage more extensive training data, enhancing its 
predictive accuracy and generalizability. Moving to 15-Fold Cross-Validation, there is a further enhancement 
in performance metrics across all models, particularly noted in the Q-BGWO-SQSVM, which maintains 
its superior metrics amidst more rigorous validation. This level of validation tests the models under stricter 
conditions, confirming the Q-BGWO-SQSVM’s superior adaptability and robustness in clinical diagnostic 
settings.
Throughout the INbreast dataset analysis in Table 6, increasing the cross-validation folds consistently 
improves all models’ performance, with the Q-BGWO-SQSVM model maintaining the lead. This pattern 
supports the inference that higher cross-validation folds reduce overfitting and provide a more reliable estimate 
of model performance, especially evident in the advanced modeling and optimization techniques employed by 
the Q-BGWO-SQSVM.
For the DDSM dataset, models exhibit an upward trend in performance metrics as the number of folds 
increases from 5 to 15 as presented in Table 7. The Q-BGWO-SQSVM showcases exemplary performance 
across all metrics, with other models like SVM and GB also showing significant improvements. The consistent 
Model
ACC
SEN
SPC
PRE
F1-S
MCC
5-CV
RF
0.85
0.84
0.86
0.85
0.85
0.83
KNN
0.87
0.88
0.89
0.86
0.87
0.85
DT
0.83
0.81
0.85
0.84
0.82
0.80
NB
0.86
0.87
0.88
0.85
0.86
0.84
LR
0.88
0.87
0.90
0.89
0.88
0.86
AB
0.84
0.83
0.87
0.86
0.85
0.82
GB
0.89
0.90
0.91
0.88
0.89
0.87
SVM
0.89
0.88
0.90
0.87
0.88
0.85
BGWO-SQSVM
0.92
0.91
0.94
0.93
0.92
0.90
Q-BGWO-SQSVM
0.97
0.96
0.98
0.97
0.97
0.95
10-CV
RF
0.87
0.86
0.89
0.88
0.87
0.85
KNN
0.88
0.89
0.90
0.87
0.88
0.86
DT
0.84
0.82
0.86
0.85
0.83
0.81
NB
0.87
0.88
0.89
0.86
0.87
0.85
LR
0.90
0.89
0.92
0.91
0.90
0.88
AB
0.85
0.84
0.88
0.87
0.86
0.83
GB
0.91
0.92
0.93
0.90
0.91
0.89
SVM
0.92
0.91
0.93
0.92
0.92
0.90
BGWO-SQSVM
0.94
0.93
0.96
0.95
0.94
0.92
Q-BGWO-SQSVM
0.98
0.97
0.99
0.98
0.98
0.96
15-CV
RF
0.88
0.87
0.90
0.89
0.88
0.86
KNN
0.89
0.90
0.91
0.88
0.89
0.87
DT
0.85
0.83
0.87
0.86
0.84
0.82
NB
0.88
0.89
0.90
0.87
0.88
0.86
LR
0.91
0.90
0.93
0.92
0.91
0.89
AB
0.86
0.85
0.89
0.88
0.87
0.84
GB
0.92
0.93
0.94
0.91
0.92
0.90
SVM
0.93
0.92
0.94
0.93
0.93
0.91
BGWO-SQSVM
0.95
0.94
0.97
0.96
0.95
0.93
Q-BGWO-SQSVM
0.98
0.96
0.99
0.97
0.98
0.97
Table 5.  MIAS Dataset Cross-Validation Performance Metrics.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:3254 
23
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-86671-y
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

enhancement in sensitivity and specificity indicates these models’ effectiveness in distinguishing between normal 
and pathological findings in DDSM’s complex imaging data.
In the CBIS-DDSM dataset, the Q-BGWO-SQSVM’s dominance continues, with peak performance metrics 
in the 15-Fold Cross-Validation setting, demonstrating near-perfect scores as presented in Table 8. This model’s 
effectiveness is particularly noteworthy in a dataset known for its challenging diagnostic images, proving its 
potential in high-stakes medical environments where diagnostic accuracy is critical.
For both DDSM and CBIS-DDSM datasets, increasing the validation folds improves the metrics across 
models and reinforces the benefits of robust cross-validation in achieving high generalizability and reliability. 
The consistent performance of the Q-BGWO-SQSVM across these datasets underscores its superior architectural 
and algorithmic framework, which is ideal for complex and high-dimensional medical imaging tasks. These 
evaluations reveal how advanced machine learning models, especially the Q-BGWO-SQSVM, adapt and 
perform under rigorous testing conditions, offering insights into their practical applications in medical imaging 
and diagnostics.
AUC comparison proposed algorithm with traditional ML algorithms
The ROC curve is a critical evaluation tool in assessing the effectiveness of classifiers in distinguishing between 
patients with a disease and those without it. The Area Under the Curve (AUC) is a crucial metric derived from 
the ROC curve, with higher AUC values indicating better discrimination capabilities of the model. In our study, 
we present ROC curves for four datasets: MIAS (Fig. 13A), INbreast (Fig. 13B), DDSM (Fig. 13C), and CBIS-
DDSM (Fig. 13D), evaluated using fivefold, tenfold, and 15-fold cross-validation (CV).
On the ROC curve, the True Positive Rate (TPR) is depicted on the y-axis, while False Positive Rate (FPR) is 
represented on the x-axis. AUC values close to 1 signify that the classifier can accurately differentiate between 
positive and negative class instances, achieving perfect discrimination. Conversely, an AUC of 0 would indicate 
that the classifier incorrectly classified all cases. AUC values between 0.5 and 1 suggest that the classifier can 
Model
ACC
SEN
SPC
PRE
F1-S
MCC
5-CV
RF
0.84
0.83
0.86
0.85
0.84
0.81
KNN
0.86
0.85
0.87
0.86
0.86
0.84
DT
0.82
0.80
0.85
0.83
0.81
0.78
NB
0.85
0.83
0.88
0.86
0.84
0.82
LR
0.87
0.86
0.89
0.88
0.87
0.85
AB
0.85
0.84
0.87
0.86
0.85
0.82
GB
0.88
0.87
0.90
0.89
0.88
0.86
SVM
0.89
0.88
0.91
0.90
0.89
0.87
BGWO-SQSVM
0.93
0.92
0.94
0.93
0.92
0.91
Q-BGWO-SQSVM
0.96
0.95
0.97
0.96
0.96
0.94
10-CV
RF
0.85
0.84
0.87
0.86
0.85
0.83
KNN
0.87
0.86
0.89
0.88
0.87
0.85
DT
0.83
0.81
0.86
0.84
0.82
0.80
NB
0.86
0.85
0.88
0.87
0.86
0.84
LR
0.88
0.87
0.90
0.89
0.88
0.86
AB
0.86
0.85
0.88
0.87
0.86
0.84
GB
0.90
0.89
0.92
0.91
0.90
0.88
SVM
0.91
0.90
0.93
0.92
0.91
0.89
BGWO-SQSVM
0.95
0.94
0.96
0.95
0.95
0.93
Q-BGWO-SQSVM
0.98
0.97
0.99
0.98
0.98
0.96
15-CV
RF
0.86
0.85
0.88
0.87
0.86
0.84
KNN
0.88
0.87
0.90
0.89
0.88
0.86
DT
0.84
0.82
0.87
0.85
0.83
0.81
NB
0.87
0.86
0.89
0.88
0.87
0.85
LR
0.89
0.88
0.91
0.90
0.89
0.87
AB
0.87
0.86
0.89
0.88
0.87
0.85
GB
0.91
0.90
0.93
0.92
0.91
0.89
SVM
0.92
0.91
0.94
0.93
0.92
0.90
BGWO-SQSVM
0.96
0.95
0.97
0.96
0.95
0.93
Q-BGWO-SQSVM
0.99
0.98
0.99
0.98
0.98
0.97
Table 6.  INbreast Dataset Cross-Validation Performance Metrics.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:3254 
24
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-86671-y
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

effectively distinguish between positive and negative classes, with a higher proportion of True Positives and True 
Negatives than False Positives and False Negatives. When AUC is below 0.5, the classifier’s ability to differentiate 
diminishes, and it may perform no better than random guessing or consistently assigning a fixed class to all data 
points.
The ROC curves and AUC values in the figures provide insights into the classifiers’ ability to differentiate 
between disease and non-disease instances across different datasets and CV schemes. The use of cross-validation 
helps in selecting the best-performing model, contributing to robust and reliable classification outcomes.
Comparative analysis with the state-of-the-art models
The efficacy of the proposed models was evaluated by comparing them to other approaches for breast cancer 
detection, as presented in Table 9. The comparative results are systematically detailed in the table presented 
earlier. The Q-BGWO-SQSVM algorithm demonstrated significant effectiveness across key metrics, including 
achieving 99% accuracy, 98% sensitivity, and 100% specificity in 15-fold cross-validation, which is the highest 
compared methods. These benchmarks underline its ability to provide near-perfect classification. For instance, 
compared to the SVM-AR method (98% accuracy, 98.03% sensitivity, and 97.93% specificity), the Q-BGWO-
SQSVM achieves a notable improvement in specificity, reaching 100%, which is critical for minimizing false 
positives in clinical diagnostics. Similarly, the Q-BGWO-SQSVM surpasses GWO-SVM in accuracy (97.33%), 
sensitivity (95.96%), and specificity, reflecting the advantages of the proposed hybrid optimization framework. 
This model outperforms traditional methods and sets a new standard in breast cancer diagnostics, establishing 
its dominance over other cutting-edge methodologies.
Diagnosing cancerous breast tissue is critical for reducing the disease’s complications and treating it in its 
early stages. Due to the dense breast tissue, the detection and localization of cancerous tissues have become 
more complex and error-prone. However, mammography misinterpretation may cause a needless biopsy of the 
FlaseP outcomes, increasing the patient’s anxiety. So, methods that learn to recognize breast lesions can mitigate 
Model
ACC
SEN
SPC
PRE
F1-S
MCC
5-CV
RF
0.86
0.84
0.87
0.85
0.85
0.83
KNN
0.87
0.85
0.88
0.86
0.86
0.84
DT
0.83
0.82
0.84
0.83
0.82
0.81
NB
0.84
0.83
0.85
0.84
0.84
0.82
LR
0.88
0.87
0.89
0.87
0.88
0.86
AB
0.85
0.83
0.86
0.85
0.84
0.83
GB
0.89
0.87
0.91
0.90
0.89
0.88
SVM
0.90
0.89
0.92
0.91
0.90
0.89
BGWO-SQSVM
0.94
0.93
0.95
0.94
0.94
0.93
Q-BGWO-SQSVM
0.97
0.96
0.98
0.97
0.97
0.96
10-CV
RF
0.87
0.86
0.89
0.88
0.87
0.85
KNN
0.89
0.87
0.90
0.88
0.89
0.87
DT
0.85
0.84
0.86
0.85
0.85
0.83
NB
0.86
0.85
0.88
0.87
0.86
0.84
LR
0.90
0.89
0.91
0.90
0.90
0.88
AB
0.88
0.87
0.89
0.88
0.88
0.86
GB
0.92
0.91
0.94
0.93
0.92
0.91
SVM
0.93
0.92
0.94
0.93
0.93
0.92
BGWO-SQSVM
0.96
0.95
0.97
0.96
0.96
0.95
Q-BGWO-SQSVM
0.98
0.97
0.99
0.98
0.98
0.97
15-CV
RF
0.88
0.87
0.90
0.89
0.88
0.87
KNN
0.90
0.89
0.91
0.90
0.90
0.89
DT
0.86
0.85
0.88
0.87
0.86
0.84
NB
0.87
0.86
0.89
0.88
0.87
0.85
LR
0.91
0.90
0.93
0.92
0.91
0.90
AB
0.89
0.88
0.91
0.90
0.89
0.87
GB
0.93
0.92
0.95
0.94
0.93
0.92
SVM
0.94
0.93
0.96
0.95
0.94
0.93
BGWO-SQSVM
0.97
0.96
0.98
0.97
0.97
0.96
Q-BGWO-SQSVM
0.99
0.98
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.98
Table 7.  DDSM Dataset Cross-Validation Performance Metrics.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:3254 
25
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-86671-y
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

the number of ambiguities and inaccurate predictions. These errors may be reduced if computer-based detection 
technologies aid radiologists in recognizing subtle and probably curable breast cancer. Computer-based detection 
technologies’ accuracy may enable more selective biopsies and decrease the number of biopsies. This study aims 
to improve current computerized schemes using innovative image recognition techniques to help radiologists 
diagnose microcalcifications and masses from the mammography image and cropped ROI. This research 
analyses the potential, constraints, and performance of modern deep learning and machine learning-based 
breast cancer detection systems by reducing computational and time complexity. Machine learning algorithms 
are insufficient for accurately detecting, localizing, and classifying breast densities. However, deep learning 
algorithms have reduced the false-positive rate (FPR) in mass detection and localization. Precise mammogram 
grading using deep learning-based models has a substantial advantage, including lower annotation, improved 
contextual information use, minor call-back rates, and needless examinations without losing the algorithm’s 
sensitivity. The advent of deep learning techniques has assisted in detecting, segmenting, and classifying breast 
abnormalities, which benefits radiologists and researchers.
Researchers have proposed various methodologies over the years to enhance the accuracy and efficiency 
of breast cancer diagnosis. The table below presents a comparative analysis of different methods, highlighting 
their performance in terms of accuracy (ACC), sensitivity (Sen), specificity (Spc), and cross-validation (CV) 
techniques used.
In 2018, the L-FA method achieved an accuracy of 97.28% with fivefold cross-validation, while the ELM-
SPI method reached 96.43%. The PML-Net method from the same year reported a 94.0% accuracy. Another 
approach mentioned, Kmean-SVM, demonstrated a similarly high accuracy of 97.28%.
The following year, 2019, saw the introduction of GA-OGB, which achieved 94.28% accuracy, 93.20% 
sensitivity, and 93.11% specificity. In 2020, LF-ANN achieved 97% accuracy with a sensitivity of 94%. The SVM-
AR approach reported notable high performance with 98% accuracy, 98.03% sensitivity, and 97.93% specificity. 
Other 2020 methodologies like N-B and SMO achieved 98% and 98.73% accuracy, respectively.
Model
ACC
SEN
SPC
PRE
F1-S
MCC
5-CV
RF
0.85
0.83
0.86
0.85
0.84
0.82
KNN
0.86
0.85
0.87
0.86
0.86
0.84
DT
0.82
0.80
0.84
0.83
0.81
0.79
NB
0.84
0.82
0.86
0.85
0.83
0.81
LR
0.87
0.86
0.89
0.88
0.87
0.85
AB
0.84
0.83
0.85
0.84
0.84
0.82
GB
0.88
0.87
0.90
0.89
0.88
0.86
SVM
0.89
0.88
0.91
0.90
0.89
0.87
BGWO-SQSVM
0.93
0.92
0.95
0.94
0.93
0.91
Q-BGWO-SQSVM
0.96
0.95
0.98
0.97
0.96
0.94
10-CV
RF
0.86
0.85
0.88
0.87
0.86
0.84
KNN
0.87
0.86
0.89
0.88
0.87
0.85
DT
0.83
0.81
0.85
0.84
0.82
0.80
NB
0.85
0.84
0.87
0.86
0.85
0.83
LR
0.88
0.87
0.90
0.89
0.88
0.86
AB
0.85
0.84
0.87
0.86
0.85
0.83
GB
0.90
0.89
0.92
0.91
0.90
0.88
SVM
0.92
0.91
0.94
0.93
0.92
0.90
BGWO-SQSVM
0.95
0.94
0.97
0.96
0.95
0.93
Q-BGWO-SQSVM
0.98
0.97
0.99
0.98
0.98
0.96
15-CV
RF
0.87
0.86
0.89
0.88
0.87
0.85
KNN
0.89
0.88
0.91
0.90
0.89
0.87
DT
0.84
0.83
0.86
0.85
0.84
0.82
NB
0.86
0.85
0.88
0.87
0.86
0.84
LR
0.90
0.89
0.92
0.91
0.90
0.88
AB
0.87
0.86
0.89
0.88
0.87
0.85
GB
0.91
0.90
0.93
0.92
0.91
0.89
SVM
0.93
0.92
0.95
0.94
0.93
0.91
BGWO-SQSVM
0.97
0.96
0.98
0.97
0.96
0.94
Q-BGWO-SQSVM
0.99
0.98
1.00
0.99
0.99
0.98
Table 8.  CBIS-DDSM Dataset Cross-Validation Performance Metrics.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:3254 
26
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-86671-y
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

In subsequent years, various other methodologies were proposed. Disep-Net, introduced in 2021, achieved 
95.60% accuracy. In 2023, a combination of LR + SVM reached 98.77% accuracy. By 2024, methods such as BC-
NET and GWO-SVM demonstrated 98.01 and 97.33% accuracy, respectively.
Particularly notable are the methods that utilized more robust cross-validation techniques. The proposed 
Q-BGWO-SQSVM method, detailed in this study, demonstrated exceptional performance across various cross-
validation techniques. Specifically, it showed remarkable outcomes with an accuracy of 99.00%, sensitivity of 
98.00%, and specificity of 100% in 15-fold cross-validation. This high level of performance indicates near-perfect 
Fig.13.  AUC Comparison.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:3254 
27
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-86671-y
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

classification capability, significantly outperforming other methods and setting a new benchmark in breast 
cancer diagnostics.
The proposed hybrid models, particularly the Q-BGWO-SQSVM, demonstrate superior performance 
compared to existing methods, providing a robust and efficient approach to breast cancer diagnosis. The use of 
varying cross-validation techniques further validates the reliability and generalizability of these models.
Conclusions
This paper presents a novel approach to classifying breast cancer by combining a quantum-inspired binary 
Grey Wolf Optimizer (Q-BGWO) with sophisticated computational models such as SqueezeNet and Support 
Vector Machines (SVM). The procedure consists of two separate stages. Firstly, it involves extracting important 
characteristics from mammographic pictures, identifying significant indications such as calcifications and 
masses. This extraction establishes the foundation for the subsequent phase, in which an advanced hybrid 
classification algorithm accurately differentiates between benign and malignant tumours.
Applying the Q-BGWO method to optimize SVM parameters significantly improves classification accuracy. 
Thorough testing on the CBIS-DDSM dataset has shown that the Q-BGWO-SQSVM model achieves remarkable 
accuracy rates: 98% in tenfold cross-validation, 96% in fivefold cross-validation, and an exceptional 99% accuracy 
with 100% specificity in 15-fold cross-validation situations. These results demonstrate the model’s effectiveness 
and highlight this method’s resilience across different cross-validation settings. The BGWO-SVM version shown 
excellent performance, highlighting the strength of this method.
This method’s effectiveness stems from its accuracy and innovative combination of quantum physics and 
machine learning technologies, establishing a new benchmark in breast cancer diagnosis. Although the findings 
show promise, the research demonstrates the foundation for future improvements. Expanding the validation to 
include a wide range of datasets will verify the method’s suitability worldwide. Future advancements may consist 
of using more sophisticated deep learning methods and investigating novel optimization strategies to enhance 
diagnosis accuracy while reducing processing requirements.
Improving the method for selecting areas of interest might enhance the precision of diagnostic accuracy. As we 
progress further, it is crucial to translate these improvements into clinical settings by extensively validating them 
with bigger real-world datasets and collaborating with medical specialists. This is necessary to transform these 
scientific discoveries into useful diagnostic tools. This research not only pushes the boundaries of technology in 
detecting early breast cancer but also makes a significant impact in reducing mortality rates and improving the 
effectiveness of computer-aided diagnosis systems in medical imaging. This paves the way for more dependable 
and efficient healthcare solutions in oncology.
Ref #
Methodology
ACC%
Sen%
Spc%
97
D-T
95.8
–
–
40
GSL
75.05
–
–
72
FCM-ELM
96.46
–
–
74
GL-SGL1/2
92.42
–
–
48
L-FA
97.28
–
–
47
ELM-SPI
96.43
–
–
98
PML-Net
94.0
–
–
34
Kmean-SVM
97.28
–
–
36
GA-OGB
94.28
93.20
93.11
99
LF-ANN
97
94.00
–
49
SVM-AR
98.00
98.03
97.93
100
N-B
98
–
–
j-48
97.54
–
–
SMO
98.73
–
–
101
CNN
92.54
–
–
39
FA-EMODE
96.86
–
–
102
DBN-SFO
91.5
94.1
72.4
103
Disep-Net
95.60
–
–
76
DT-AFIS
95.91
–
–
10
LR + SVM
98.77
–
–
65
BC-NET
98.01
97.75
98.16
104
GWO-SVM
97.33
95.96
–
Proposed
Q-BGWO-SQSVM
99.00
98.00
1.00
Table 9.  State-of-the-art Comparison.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:3254 
28
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-86671-y
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

Data availability
The datasets used in this study are publicly available. And can be download using the links below. MIAS: ​h​t​t​p​:​/​
/​p​e​i​p​a​.​e​s​s​e​x​.​a​c​.​u​k​/​i​n​f​o​/​m​i​a​s​.​h​t​m​l​  INbreast: https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/martholi/inbreast  DDSM: ​h​t​t​p​:​
/​/​w​w​w​.​e​n​g​.​u​s​f​.​e​d​u​/​c​v​p​r​g​/​M​a​m​m​o​g​r​a​p​h​y​/​D​a​t​a​b​a​s​e​.​h​t​m​l​ CBIS-DDSM: ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​w​w​w​.​c​a​n​c​e​r​i​m​a​g​i​n​g​a​r​c​h​i​v​e​.​n​e​t​/​
c​o​l​l​e​c​t​i​o​n​/​c​b​i​s​-​d​d​s​m​/​
Received: 3 November 2024; Accepted: 13 January 2025
References
	 1.	 Sung, H. et al. Global cancer statistics 2020: GLOBOCAN estimates of incidence and mortality worldwide for 36 cancers in 185 
countries. CA. Cancer J. Clin. https://doi.org/10.3322/caac.21660 (2021).
	 2.	 World Cancer Report. World Heal. Organ. (2023).
	 3.	 Sharma, A. & Ives, C. Management of breast cancer: Basic principles. Surgery (United Kingdom) 40, 113–120 (2022).
	 4.	 Moo, T. A., Sanford, R., Dang, C. & Morrow, M. Overview of breast cancer therapy. PET Clin. 13, 339–354 (2018).
	 5.	 Organization, W.H. WHO Cancer factsheet. Who (2017).
	 6.	 Sahu, Y. et al. A CNN-SVM based computer aided diagnosis of breast cancer using histogram K-means segmentation technique. 
Multimed. Tools Appl. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-022-13807-x (2023).
	 7.	 Momenimovahed, Z. & Salehiniya, H. Epidemiological characteristics of and risk factors for breast cancer in the world. Breast 
Cancer Targets Ther. https://doi.org/10.2147/BCTT.S176070 (2019).
	 8.	 Lopez, M.E.; Olutoye, O.O. Breast embryology, anatomy, and physiology. In Endocrine Surgery in Children. (2017).
	 9.	 Kretz, T., Mueller, K. R., Schaeffter, T. & Elster, C. Mammography image quality assurance using deep learning. IEEE Trans. 
Biomed. Eng. https://doi.org/10.1109/TBME.2020.2983539 (2020).
	 10.	 Uddin, K. M. M., Biswas, N., Rikta, S. T. & Dey, S. K. Machine learning-based diagnosis of breast cancer utilizing feature 
optimization technique. Comput. Methods Programs Biomed. Updat. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmpbup.2023.100098 (2023).
	 11.	 Aswathy, M. A. & Jagannath, M. Detection of breast cancer on digital histopathology images: Present status and future possibilities. 
Inform. Med. Unlocked https://doi.org/10.1016/j.imu.2016.11.001 (2017).
	 12.	 Sain, S. R. & Vapnik, V. N. The nature of statistical learning theory. Technometrics https://doi.org/10.2307/1271324 (1996).
	 13.	 Cristianini, N.; Shawe-Taylor, J. An Introduction to Support Vector Machines and Other Kernel-Based Learning Methods. (2000).
	 14.	 Boser, B.E.; Guyon, I.M.; Vapnik, V.N. Training algorithm for optimal margin classifiers. In Proceedings of the Proceedings of the 
Fifth Annual ACM Workshop on Computational Learning Theory. (1992).
	 15.	 McMahon, D. Quantum Computing Explained. (2007).
	 16.	 Ferry, D. An introduction to quantum computing. In Quantum Mechanics. (2020).
	 17.	 Mirjalili, S., Mirjalili, S. M. & Lewis, A. Grey wolf optimizer. Adv. Eng. Softw. 69, 46–61 (2014).
	 18.	 Uymaz, S. A., Tezel, G. & Yel, E. Artificial algae algorithm (AAA) for nonlinear global optimization. Appl. Soft Comput. J. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​
/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​a​s​o​c​.​2​0​1​5​.​0​3​.​0​0​3​ (2015).
	 19.	 Li, X. L., Shao, Z. J. & Qian, J. X. Optimizing method based on autonomous animals: Fish-swarm algorithm. Xitong Gongcheng 
Lilun yu Shijian/System Eng. Theory Pract. 22, 32–38 (2002).
	 20.	 Muro, C., Escobedo, R., Spector, L. & Coppinger, R. P. Wolf-Pack (Canis Lupus) hunting strategies emerge from simple rules in 
computational simulations. Behav. Process. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beproc.2011.09.006 (2011).
	 21.	 Sahu, B.; Dash, S. BIBHU: Biomarker identification using bio-inspired evolutionary hybrid unique machine learning model. In 
Proceedings of the 2023 World Conference on Communication and Computing. (2023).
	 22.	 Sahu, B.; Dash, S. Hybrid multifilter ensemble based feature selection model from microarray cancer datasets using GWO with 
deep learning. In Proceedings of the 2023 3rd International Conference on Intelligent Technologies. (2023).
	 23.	 Sahoo, G. et al. Predicting breast cancer relapse from histopathological images with ensemble machine learning models. Curr. 
Oncol. 31, 6577–6597 (2024).
	 24.	 Sahu, B.; Dash, S. Hybrid binary grey wolf with jaya optimizer for biomarker selection from cancer datasets. In Proceedings of the 
2023 International Conference on Emerging Smart Computing and Informatics. (2023).
	 25.	 Pati, A., Parhi, M., Pattanayak, B. K., Sahu, B. & Khasim, S. CanDiag: Fog empowered transfer deep learning based approach for 
cancer diagnosis. Designs https://doi.org/10.3390/designs7030057 (2023).
	 26.	 Bacanin, N. et al. Performance of a novel chaotic firefly algorithm with enhanced exploration for tackling global optimization 
problems: Application for dropout regularization. Mathematics https://doi.org/10.3390/math9212705 (2021).
	 27.	 Malakar, S., Ghosh, M., Bhowmik, S., Sarkar, R. & Nasipuri, M. A GA based hierarchical feature selection approach for handwritten 
word recognition. Neural Comput. Appl. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00521-018-3937-8 (2020).
	 28.	 Zivkovic, M. et al. Novel hybrid firefly algorithm: An application to enhance XGBoost tuning for intrusion detection classification. 
PeerJ Comput. Sci. https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj-cs.956 (2022).
	 29.	 Dobrojevic, M. et al. Addressing internet of things security by enhanced sine cosine metaheuristics tuned hybrid machine 
learning model and results interpretation based on SHAP approach. PeerJ Comput. Sci. https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj-cs.1405 
(2023).
	 30.	 Jovanovic, L.; Gajevic, M.; Dobrojevic, M.; Budimirovic, N.; Bacanin, N.; Zivkovic, M. Tackling IoT security challenge by 
metaheuristics tuned extreme learning machine. In Proceedings of the Lecture Notes in Networks and Systems. (2023). 
	 31.	 Marcano-Cedeño, A., Quintanilla-Domínguez, J. & Andina, D. WBCD breast cancer database classification applying artificial 
metaplasticity neural network. Expert Syst. Appl. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2011.01.167 (2011).
	 32.	 Chen, H. L., Yang, B., Liu, J. & Liu, D. Y. A support vector machine classifier with rough set-based feature selection for breast 
cancer diagnosis. Expert Syst. Appl. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2011.01.120 (2011).
	 33.	 Chen, H. L. et al. Support vector machine based diagnostic system for breast cancer using swarm intelligence. J. Med. Syst. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​
/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​0​7​/​s​1​0​9​1​6​-​0​1​1​-​9​7​2​3​-​0​ (2012).
	 34.	 Kumari, M.; Singh, V. Breast cancer prediction system. In Proceedings of the Procedia Computer Science. (2018).
	 35.	 Kompalli, V.S.; Kuruba, U.R. Combined effect of soft computing methods in classification. In Proceedings of the Advances in 
Intelligent Systems and Computing. (2017).
	 36.	 Lu, H., Wang, H. & Yoon, S. W. A dynamic gradient boosting machine using genetic optimizer for practical breast cancer 
prognosis. Expert Syst. Appl. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2018.08.040 (2019).
	 37.	 Ma, B. & Xia, Y. A tribe competition-based genetic algorithm for feature selection in pattern classification. Appl. Soft Comput. J. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2017.04.042 (2017).
	 38.	 Pota, M., Esposito, M. & De Pietro, G. Designing rule-based fuzzy systems for classification in medicine. Knowl. Based Syst. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2017.03.006 (2017).
	 39.	 Nayak, S. K., Rout, P. K., Jagadev, A. K. & Swarnkar, T. Elitism based multi-objective differential evolution for feature selection: A 
filter approach with an efficient redundancy measure. J. King Saud Univ. Comput. Inf. Sci. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​j​k​s​u​c​i​.​2​0​1​7​.​0​
8​.​0​0​1​ (2020).
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:3254 
29
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-86671-y
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

	 40.	 Shoeleh, F. & Asadpour, M. Graph based skill acquisition and transfer learning for continuous reinforcement learning domains. 
Pattern Recognit. Lett. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patrec.2016.08.009 (2017).
	 41.	 Bashir, S., Qamar, U. & Khan, F. H. Heterogeneous classifiers fusion for dynamic breast cancer diagnosis using weighted vote 
based ensemble. Qual. Quant. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11135-014-0090-z (2015).
	 42.	 Tuba, E.; Tuba, M.; Simian, D. Adjusted bat algorithm for tuning of support vector machine parameters. In Proceedings of the 2016 
IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation. (2016).
	 43.	 Aalaei, S., Shahraki, H., Rowhanimanesh, A. & Eslami, S. Feature selection using genetic algorithm for breast cancer diagnosis: 
Experiment on three different datasets. Iran. J. Basic Med. Sci. 19, 476 (2016).
	 44.	 Kumar Mandal, S. Performance analysis of data mining algorithms for breast cancer cell detection using naïve Bayes, logistic 
regression and decision tree. Int. J. Eng. Comput. Sci. 6, 20388–20391 (2017).
	 45.	 Muslim, M.A.; Rukmana, S.H.; Sugiharti, E.; Prasetiyo, B.; Alimah, S. Optimization of C4.5 algorithm-based particle swarm 
optimization for breast cancer diagnosis. In Proceedings of the Journal of Physics: Conference Series. (2018).
	 46.	 Liu, N. et al. Improved cost-sensitive support vector machine classifier for breast cancer diagnosis. Math. Probl. Eng. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​
o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​5​5​/​2​0​1​8​/​3​8​7​5​0​8​2​ (2018).
	 47.	 Kassani, P. H., Teoh, A. B. J. & Kim, E. Sparse pseunverse incremental extreme learning machine. Neurocomputing ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​
g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​n​e​u​c​o​m​.​2​0​1​8​.​0​1​.​0​8​7​ (2018).
	 48.	 Pota, M., Esposito, M. & De Pietro, G. Likelihood-fuzzy analysis: from data, through statistics, to interpretable fuzzy classifiers. 
Int. J. Approx. Reason. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijar.2017.10.022 (2018).
	 49.	 Maalmi, K. Breast cancer classification with reduced feature set using association rules and support vector machine. Netw. Model. 
Anal. Heal. Inform. Bioinform. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13721-020-00237-8 (2020).
	 50.	 Fu, Z.; Zhang, D.; Zhao, X.; Li, X. Adaboost algorithm with floating threshold. In Proceedings of the IET Conference Publications. 
(2012).
	 51.	 Prasad, Y.; Biswas, K.K.; Jain, C.K. SVM Classifier based feature selection using GA, ACO and PSO for SiRNA design. In 
Proceedings of the Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes 
in Bioinformatics). (2010).
	 52.	 Zheng, B., Yoon, S. W. & Lam, S. S. Breast cancer diagnosis based on feature extraction using a hybrid of K-means and support 
vector machine algorithms. Expert Syst. Appl. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2013.08.044 (2014).
	 53.	 De Falco, I., Della Cioppa, A. & Tarantino, E. Facing classification problems with particle swarm optimization. Appl. Soft Comput. 
J. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2005.09.004 (2007).
	 54.	 Agarap, A.F.M. On breast cancer detection: An application of machine learning algorithms on the wisconsin diagnostic dataset. 
In: Proceedings of the ACM International Conference Proceeding Series. (2018).
	 55.	 Huang, H. et al. A new fruit fly optimization algorithm enhanced support vector machine for diagnosis of breast cancer based on 
high-level features. BMC Bioinform. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12859-019-2771-z (2019).
	 56.	 Xie, T., Yao, J. & Zhou, Z. DA-based parameter optimization of combined kernel support vector machine for cancer diagnosis. 
Processes https://doi.org/10.3390/pr7050263 (2019).
	 57.	 Rajaguru, H. & Sannasi Chakravarthy, S. R. Analysis of decision tree and K-nearest neighbor algorithm in the classification of 
breast cancer. Asian Pacific J. Cancer Prev. https://doi.org/10.31557/APJCP.2019.20.12.3777 (2019).
	 58.	 Dhahri, H., Al Maghayreh, E., Mahmood, A., Elkilani, W. & Faisal Nagi, M. Automated breast cancer diagnosis based on machine 
learning algorithms. J. Healthc. Eng. https://doi.org/10.1155/2019/4253641 (2019).
	 59.	 Hemeida, A. M. et al. Implementation of nature-inspired optimization algorithms in some data mining tasks. Ain Shams Eng. J. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asej.2019.10.003 (2020).
	 60.	 Telsang, V.A.; Hegde, K. Breast cancer prediction analysis using machine learning algorithms. In Proceedings of the Proceedings of 
the 2020 IEEE International Conference on Communication, Computing and Industry 4.0. (2020).
	 61.	 Umme Salma, M. & Doreswamy, D. Hybrid BATGSA: A metaheuristic model for classification of breast cancer data. Int. J. Adv. 
Intell. Paradig. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJAIP.2020.105144 (2020).
	 62.	 Singh, I.; Bansal, R.; Gupta, A.; Singh, A. A hybrid grey wolf-whale optimization algorithm for optimizing SVM in breast cancer 
diagnosis. In Proceedings of the PDGC 2020 - 2020 6th International Conference on Parallel, Distributed and Grid Computing. 
(2020).
	 63.	 Badr, E., Almotairi, S., Salam, M. A. & Ahmed, H. New sequential and parallel support vector machine with grey wolf optimizer 
for breast cancer diagnosis. Alexandria Eng. J. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aej.2021.07.024 (2022).
	 64.	 Badr, E., Salam, M. A., Almotairi, S. & Ahmed, H. From linear programming approach to metaheuristic approach: Scaling 
techniques. Complexity https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/9384318 (2021).
	 65.	 Bilal, A. et al. BC-QNet: A quantum-infused ELM model for breast cancer diagnosis. Comput. Biol. Med. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​
/​J​.​C​O​M​P​B​I​O​M​E​D​.​2​0​2​4​.​1​0​8​4​8​3​ (2024).
	 66.	 Bilal, A., Liu, X., Shafiq, M., Ahmed, Z. & Long, H. NIMEQ-SACNet: A novel self-attention precision medicine model for vision-
threatening diabetic retinopathy using image data. Comput. Biol. Med. 171, 108099. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​J​.​C​O​M​P​B​I​O​M​E​D​.​2​
0​2​4​.​1​0​8​0​9​9​ (2024).
	 67.	 Bilal, Anas et al. Improved support vector machine based on CNN-SVD for vision-threatening diabetic retinopathy detection and 
classification. PLoS ONE 19, e0295951 (2024).
	 68.	 Tapkan, Pi., Özbakir, L. & Baykasoʇlu, A. Bee algorithms for parallel two-sided assembly line balancing problem with walking 
times. Appl. Soft Comput. J. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2015.11.017 (2016).
	 69.	 Połap, D., Kesik, K., Woźniak, M. & Damaševičius, R. Parallel technique for the metaheuristic algorithms using devoted local 
search and manipulating the solutions space. Appl. Sci. https://doi.org/10.3390/app8020293 (2018).
	 70.	 Jiao, S., Gao, Y., Feng, J., Lei, T. & Yuan, X. Does deep learning always outperform simple linear regression in optical imaging?. 
Opt. Express https://doi.org/10.1364/oe.382319 (2020).
	 71.	 Chauhan, D. et al. Comparison of machine learning and deep learning for view identification from cardiac magnetic resonance 
images. Clin. Imaging https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinimag.2021.11.013 (2022).
	 72.	 Liangjun, C., Honeine, P., Hua, Q., Jihong, Z. & Xia, S. Correntropy-based robust multilayer extreme learning machines. Pattern 
Recognit. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patcog.2018.07.011 (2018).
	 73.	 Jafari-Marandi, R., Davarzani, S., Soltanpour Gharibdousti, M. & Smith, B. K. An optimum ANN-based breast cancer diagnosis: 
Bridging gaps between ANN learning and decision-making goals. Appl. Soft Comput. J. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2018.07.060 
(2018).
	 74.	 Li, F., Zurada, J. M. & Wu, W. Smooth group L1/2 regularization for input layer of feedforward neural networks. Neurocomputing 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2018.06.046 (2018).
	 75.	 Taghizadeh, E., Heydarheydari, S., Saberi, A., JafarpoorNesheli, S. & Rezaeijo, S. M. Breast cancer prediction with transcriptome 
profiling using feature selection and machine learning methods. BMC Bioinform. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12859-022-04965-8 
(2022).
	 76.	 Chen, T. et al. A decision tree-initialised neuro-fuzzy approach for clinical decision support. Artif. Intell. Med. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​
.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​a​r​t​m​e​d​.​2​0​2​0​.​1​0​1​9​8​6​ (2021).
	 77.	 Van Der Maaten, L. & Hinton, G. Visualizing data using T-SNE. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 9, 2579–2605 (2008).
	 78.	 Suckling, J. et al. The mammographic image analysis society digital mammogram database. Expert. Medica Int. Congr. Ser. 1069, 
375–378 (1994).
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:3254 
30
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-86671-y
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

	 79.	 Moreira, I. C. et al. INbreast: Toward a full-field digital mammographic database. Acad. Radiol. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​a​c​r​a​.​2​0​
1​1​.​0​9​.​0​1​4​ (2012).
	 80.	 Florida, U. of S. Digital database for screening mammography (DDSM). (2021).
	 81.	 Archive, C.I. Curated breast imaging subset of digital database for screening mammography (CBIS-DDSM). (2023).
	 82.	 Kerlikowske, K. et al. Performance of screening mammography among women with and without a first-degree relative with breast 
cancer. Ann. Intern. Med. https:​//d​oi.​or​g/10​.732​6/00​03-​48​19-133-1​1​-200012050-00009 (2000).
	 83.	 Suri, J.S.; Sun, Y.; Janer, R. Method for Breast Screening in Fused Mammography. US Pat. 10,363,010. (2013).
	 84.	 Khamparia, A. et al. Diagnosis of breast cancer based on modern mammography using hybrid transfer learning. Multidimens. 
Syst. Signal Process. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11045-020-00756-7 (2021).
	 85.	 Dhungel, N.; Carneiro, G.; Bradley, A.P. Automated mass detection in mammograms using cascaded deep learning and random 
forests. In Proceedings of the 2015 International Conference on Digital Image Computing: Techniques and Applications, DICTA. 
2015; (2015).
	 86.	 Ting, F. F., Tan, Y. J. & Sim, K. S. Convolutional neural network improvement for breast cancer classification. Expert Syst. Appl. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2018.11.008 (2019).
	 87.	 Mahmood, T., Li, J., Pei, Y. & Akhtar, F. An automated in-depth feature learning algorithm for breast abnormality prognosis and 
robust characterization from mammography images using deep transfer learning. Biology (Basel) ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​3​3​9​0​/​b​i​o​l​o​g​
y​1​0​0​9​0​8​5​9​ (2021).
	 88.	 Wu, E.; Wu, K.; Cox, D.; Lotter, W. Conditional Infilling GANs for Data Augmentation in Mammogram Classification. In 
Proceedings of the Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes 
in Bioinformatics), 11040 (2018).
	 89.	 Sérvulo, Soares et al. Classification of breast regions as mass and non-mass based on digital mammograms using taxonomic 
indexes and SVM. Comput. Biol. Med. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiomed.2014.11.016 (2015).
	 90.	 Medina-Carnicer, R., Madrid-Cuevas, F. J., Fernández-García, N. L. & Carmona-Poyato, A. Evaluation of global thresholding 
techniques in non-contextual edge detection. Pattern Recognit. Lett. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patrec.2004.11.024 (2005).
	 91.	 Otsu, N. Threshold selection method from gray-level histograms. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​t​s​m​c​.​1​9​
7​9​.​4​3​1​0​0​7​6​ (1979).
	 92.	 Srikanth, K. et al. Meta-heuristic framework: Quantum inspired binary grey wolf optimizer for unit commitment problem. 
Comput. Electr. Eng. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compeleceng.2017.07.023 (2018).
	 93.	 Başaran, E. Classification of white blood cells with SVM by selecting SqueezeNet and LIME properties by MRMR method. Signal 
Image Video Process. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11760-022-02141-2 (2022).
	 94.	 Bilal, A., Sun, G., Mazhar, S., Imran, A. & Latif, J. A transfer learning and U-Net-based automatic detection of diabetic retinopathy 
from fundus images. Comput. Methods Biomech. Biomed. Eng. Imaging Vis. 10, 663–674 (2022).
	 95.	 Kandil, H., Soliman, A., Alghamdi, N. S., Jennings, J. R. & El-Baz, A. Using mean arterial pressure in hypertension diagnosis versus 
using either systolic or diastolic blood pressure measurements. Biomedicines https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines11030849 
(2023).
	 96.	 Derrac, J., García, S., Molina, D. & Herrera, F. A practical tutorial on the use of nonparametric statistical tests as a methodology for 
comparing evolutionary and swarm intelligence algorithms. Swarm Evol. Comput. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.swevo.2011.02.002 
(2011).
	 97.	 Hayashi, Y. & Nakano, S. Use of a recursive-rule extraction algorithm with J48graft to achieve highly accurate and concise rule 
extraction from a large breast cancer dataset. Inform. Med. Unlocked https://doi.org/10.1016/j.imu.2015.12.002 (2015).
	 98.	 Jiao, Z., Gao, X., Wang, Y. & Li, J. A parasitic metric learning net for breast mass classification based on mammography. Pattern 
Recognit. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patcog.2017.07.008 (2018).
	 99.	 Hajiabadi, H., Babaiyan, V., Zabihzadeh, D. & Hajiabadi, M. Combination of loss functions for robust breast cancer prediction. 
Comput. Electr. Eng. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compeleceng.2020.106624 (2020).
	100.	 Mohammed, S.A.; Darrab, S.; Noaman, S.A.; Saake, G. Analysis of Breast Cancer Detection Using Different Machine Learning 
Techniques. In Proceedings of the Communications in Computer and Information Science. 1234, (2020).
	101.	 Gnanasekaran, V. S., Joypaul, S., Sundaram, P. M. & Chairman, D. D. Deep learning algorithm for breast masses classification in 
mammograms. IET Image Process https://doi.org/10.1049/iet-ipr.2020.0070 (2020).
	102.	 Shen, L. et al. Optimal breast tumor diagnosis using discrete wavelet transform and deep belief network based on improved 
sunflower optimization method. Biomed. Signal Process. Control https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bspc.2020.101953 (2020).
	103.	 Yu, X., Xia, K. & Zhang, Y. D. DisepNet for breast abnormality recognition. Comput. Electr. Eng. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​c​o​m​p​e​
l​e​c​e​n​g​.​2​0​2​0​.​1​0​6​9​6​1​ (2021).
	104.	 Bilal, Anas, Imran, Azhar, Baig, Talha Imtiaz & Xiaowen Liu, E. A. N. Breast cancer diagnosis using support vector machine 
optimized by improved quantum inspired grey wolf optimization. Sci. Rep. 14, 10714. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​3​8​/​s​4​1​5​9​8​-​0​2​4​-​6​1​3​2​
2​-​w​ (2024).
Author contributions
Conceptualization, A.B, and A.A; methodology, A.B F.K and A.T; software, A.B. and F.K; validation, A.A, A.T 
and M.S.; formal analysis, A.A, M.S, and H.L.; investigation, A.A, M.S.; resources, H.L.; data curation, A.B, A.A, 
F.K; writing—original draft preparation, A.B.; writing—review and editing, A.T and M.S,  visualization, A.B, 
A.A,F.K and H.L.; All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding
This research was funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.62262019) and the Hainan 
Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (823RC488).
Declarations
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material available at ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​
0​.​1​0​3​8​/​s​4​1​5​9​8​-​0​2​5​-​8​6​6​7​1​-​y​.​
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to H.L.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:3254 
31
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-86671-y
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

Publisher’s note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Open Access   This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 
4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in 
any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide 
a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. You do not have 
permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or 
other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence 
and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to 
obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit ​h​t​t​p​:​/​/​c​r​e​a​t​i​v​e​c​o​m​m​o​
n​s​.​o​r​g​/​l​i​c​e​n​s​e​s​/​b​y​-​n​c​-​n​d​/​4​.​0​/​.​
© The Author(s) 2025 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:3254 
32
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-86671-y
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
