Source-PDF: D:\Review\Paper\Survey\A systematic review of quantum machine.pdf
Relative-Path: Paper\Survey\A systematic review of quantum machine.pdf
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

npj | digital medicine
Article
Published in partnership with Seoul National University Bundang Hospital
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-025-01597-z
A systematic review of quantum machine
learning for digital health
Check for updates
Riddhi S. Gupta1
, Carolyn E. Wood1, Teyl Engstrom2, Jason D. Pole2 & Sally Shrapnel1,2
The growth in digitization of health data provides opportunities for using algorithmic techniques for
data analysis. This systematic review assesses whether quantum machine learning (QML) algorithms
outperform existing classical methods for clinical decisioning or health service delivery. Included
studies use electronic health/medical records, or reasonable proxy data, and QML algorithms
designed for quantum computing hardware. Databases PubMed, Embase, IEEE, Scopus, and preprint
server arXiv were searched for studies dated 01/01/2015–10/06/2024. Of an initial 4915 studies, 169
were eligible, with 123 then excluded for insufﬁcient rigor. Only 16 studies consider realistic operating
conditions involving quantum hardware or noisy simulations. We ﬁnd nearly all encountered quantum
models form a subset of general QML structures. Scalability of data encoding is partly addressed but
requires restrictive hardware assumptions. Overall, performance differentials between quantum and
classical algorithms show no consistent trend to support empirical quantum utility in digital health.
Recent years have seen a proliferation of research proclaiming the utility of
quantummachinelearning(QML)algorithmsforanalyzingclassicaldatain
many sectors, e.g. ﬁnance, cybersecurity, logistics, pharmaceuticals, energy,
minerals, and healthcare. With the increasing digitization of health data, the
growthof electronichealth and medicalrecords1 paves the wayfortheuseof
algorithmic techniques - quantum or classical - for analyzing this data.
Potential digital health applications could include clinical decision support,
clinical predictive health and health monitoring, public health applications
and improving health services delivery and data fusion2–5. The potential for
use-case discovery for QML in healthcare6 and biomedical7 applications is
found to be compelling in previous systematic reviews. Other broader
reviews on quantum computing for health, biology and lifesciences8–15
hypothesize the potential utility of QML algorithms or quantum sub-
routines in health, but none of these works are rigorous systematic reviews
(and thus reproducible). Indeed, across all of these standard and systematic
reviews, we ﬁnd that the strength of the current evidence base even under
mildly realistic operating conditions is not examined.
Characterizing the role of QML algorithms applied to real-world
classical data is nuanced and a challenging question in applications devel-
opment but also in fundamental QML theory16,17. Quantum advantage
refers to asymptotic reduction in computational resources (or some other
metric18) required by quantum algorithms when compared to classical
counterparts, i.e. resources are saved as problem size scales to inﬁnity.
Empirical quantum advantage19 colloquially refers to ﬁnite-sized simula-
tions or experiments using quantum over classical algorithms to perform a
task, where one assumes any desired resource savings will scale to larger
problems, e.g. in qubit number, high-dimensional or highly structured
datasets. However, for classical datasets of arbitrary structure such as those
encountered in healthcare settings, there is no known theoretically provable
quantumadvantage18.Instead,theﬁeldreliesonmostlyempiricalanalysisof
QML performance for a variety of pseudo-real-world data, where perfor-
mance differentials between quantum and classical methods on these
smaller problems constitute evidence for testing empirical quantum
advantage. Most computational analysis of scaling behavior assumes ideal
operating conditions and it is unknown if QML methods will retain any
beneﬁts in realistic operating settings, such as on near-term noisy quantum
hardware. In some cases, the role of quantum algorithms for solving
inference tasks has been entirely replaced by equivalent classical capability,
in a process known as dequantization (e.g.20,21).
In this work, we undertake a systematic literature review of QML
applications in digital health between 2015 and 2024. As typical in medical
research settings, a systematic literature review is a standard methodological
approach for assessing the strength of evidence for proposed interventions
in clinical contexts and public health22. Based on existing evidence in lit-
erature, we use the SPICE framework23 to ask: In developing digital health
technologies, could quantum machine learning algorithms potentially
outperform existing classical methods in efﬁcacy or efﬁciency? A systematic
review was conducted in line with the PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items
for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses)24 (Supplementary Note 2)
detailed in Methods. Our methodology assesses the strength of the evidence
and dominant trends associated with using QML algorithms for digital
1School of Mathematics and Physics, The University of Queensland, St Lucia, 4067 QLD, Australia. 2QDHeC. Centre for Health Services Research. Faculty of
Medicine, The University of Queensland, Herston, 4006 QLD, Australia.
e-mail: riddhi.gupta@uq.edu.au
npj Digital Medicine |  (2025) 8:237 
1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;

health, including assessing the extent to which performance robustness of
proposed QML algorithms has been characterized.
Our current-state analysis reveals that the empirical evidence for QML
in digital health cannot conclusively address our research question. We ﬁnd
that numerous studies had to be excluded due to a lack of technical rigor in
their analysis of QML algorithms. The majority of eligible studies use only
ideal simulations of QML algorithms, thereby excluding the resource
overhead incurred for error-mitigated or error-corrected algorithms
required for noisy quantum hardware. Of high quality studies, nearly all
QML algorithms are found to be linear quantum models, and therefore
represent a small subset of general QML. Most use-cases in digital health
focussed on providing clinical support, and no studies considered health
service delivery or public health applications. Only two synthesized studies
used electronic health records for quantum machine learning applications,
while the remaining studies repeatedly gravitated towards a handful of
open-source health databases. Finally, 13 studies used quantum hardware
demonstrations and separated into two classes: either algorithms for a gate-
based, universal quantum computer using up to 20 qubits, or quantum
annealers using O(100) qubits. Whether potential advantages of QML can
be retained in the presence of noise is largely unaddressed in all studies.
WedevotetheremainderofthisIntroductiontoprovidinganoverview
of quantum machine learning for those unfamiliar with this domain. We
will also brieﬂy discuss performance metrics, properties of different families
of quantummachinelearning algorithms,techniques forencodingdata into
quantum states, and data pre-processing. Quantum algorithms refer to a
broad category of algorithms, for which it is desired that quantum com-
puting hardware will be required to perform some of the computations. We
distinguish these quantum algorithms from quantum-inspired classical
algorithms that use insights from quantum mechanics to perform com-
putations on classical computers. Quantum machine learning algorithms
are a subset of quantum algorithms. For the scope of this review, a quantum
machine learning algorithm takes as input a classical dataset, and an
inference problem is deﬁned on the classical dataset.
Much of the literature we encountered in our review discussed the
potential beneﬁts of using quantum machine learning techniques in lieu of
classical methods to analyze health data. The terminology used to com-
municate these beneﬁts is often ill-deﬁned, e.g. quantum ‘speed-up’, ‘utility’
or ‘advantage’ are used interchangeably. In QML, computational ‘advan-
tage’ accrues when a QML algorithm can reduce the number of operations
required to solve this inference problem as the size of the problem becomes
asymptotically large. Here, the problem size is typically associated with
features of the input data e.g. with input data dimension. From a computer
scienceperspective,algorithmscaneitherimproveonthenumberof queries
or samples required (sample complexity) or the number of parallelizable
quantum operations (time complexity, or runtime). When quantum algo-
rithms enable improvements in complexity, this is sometimes referred to as
‘quantumadvantage’,while‘speed-up’isoftenreservedonlyforreductionin
time complexity. An additional metric of memory complexity quantiﬁes the
size or type of data structures required to efﬁciently store and recall inter-
mediary information during computation. While memory complexity is
typically notdiscussed intheliterature forquantumalgorithms, subroutines
suchasQRAMmayplayananalogousrole.Acomparisonofcomputational
costs of selected classical vs. quantum algorithms for ideal mathematical
regimes can be found in ref. 11, but these were not encountered for real-
world health data in our review.
Quantum algorithms separate into two different categories in this
review: gate-based quantum models, or quantum annealing. This categor-
ization can broadly reﬂect the difference between digital and universal vs.
analog and non-universal quantum computing. While we provide a high-
level summary of classes of quantum algorithms that were encountered in
thisreview,itcannotbeconstrued asa comprehensiveoverview of quantum
machine learning (see for example, refs. 25,26). Background quantum
notation and a fuller discussion is provided in Supplementary Note 1. The
majority of studies in the review focussed on quantum algorithms designed
for gate-based universal quantum computers. These algorithms include
quantum kernel methods (including quantum support vector machines),
quantum neural networks, quantum convolutional neural networks, and
quantum deep learning. We summarize the quantum computational steps
in these protocols by considering how outputs are generated from inputs in
Fig. 1 by representing these steps as quantum circuits.
In the circuit visualization of Fig. 1, inputs to a quantum algorithm are
qubit states denoted with ket-notation j  i and boxed operations denote
quantum gates. These gates are associated with reversible, logical operations
performedon quantum states. The circuit is terminated with measurements
of a quantum state which yield probabilistic outcomes, ‘0’ or ‘1’, where
probabilities are determined by the quantum circuit. Suppose for some
input quantum state, ρ0, the average output of a quantum computation is
given by f(x, θ) where (x, θ) deﬁne classical inputs to a quantum algorithm.
Here, ρ0 represents an input state, such as all qubits in their ground (zero)
state; x represents one sample of real data with dimension d, x 2 Rd for a
Fig. 1 | Common models in quantum machine learning. Quantum circuit
depictions of linear vs. non-linear embedding in quantum models27. Horizontal
wires represent qubits where input states are shown as ket j  i symbols; temporal
order of computations progresses from left to right. Boxed quantum gates (blue,
orange) are reversible rotations, or `unitary gates’, of quantum states, i.e. U† = U−1. If
data encoding (blue) is separable from variational gates (orange), then the quantum
model is linear. ‘Circuit size’ refers to the number of qubits, while ‘circuit depth’
represents the number of time-steps required to run the full circuit assuming that
quantum operations on disjoint qubits have been parallelized. a–c Measurements
(msmts.) are pushed to the end; quantum circuit can be summarized by a unitary
operation. d Mid-circuit measurement outcomes change quantum operations ‘on
the ﬂy’ (pink). Circuits with tunable θ (blue gates) can be broadly referred to as
variational (VQC) or parameterized (PQC) quantum circuits.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-025-01597-z
Article
npj Digital Medicine |  (2025) 8:237 
2

dataset with N samples, and tunable free parameters, θ, that parameterize
the circuit. One encodes data x into quantum states using a parameterized
quantum gate, denoted U(x). Meanwhile, free parameters, θ, implement
classically optimized or trained quantum gates, V(θ). With these assump-
tions, the desired output information required from the circuit is typically
givenwithreferencetoanobservablequantity, ^O.Thisoutputinformationis
inherently statistical, i.e. one must inferaverage information about ^O from a
statistical ensemble of ‘0’ or ‘1’ measurements obtained by repeatedly pre-
paring and measuring the same quantum circuit Ns number of times.
Therefore to extract information about ^O, we build up an ensemble of
quantum measurements by repeatedly running a quantum circuit Ns
numberoftimesfora singleinstanceof x,and repeatingfordifferentchoices
of x.
A quantummachine learning algorithm typically consistsof input data
(x-dependent) and tunable (θ-dependent) quantum operations. Using
Supplementary Note 1, we can write the general output of a QML algorithm
as,
f ðx; θÞ :¼ Tr Uðx; θÞρ0Uyðx; θÞ^O


¼ hρx;θ; ^Oi;
ð1Þ
where the data (x-dependent) and tunable (θ-dependent) components of
the quantum state ρx,θ cannot be separated. In equation (1), U(x, θ) repre-
sents a parameterized quantum gate which depends on data x and tunable
parameters θ. The output of a QML algorithm thus computes the overlap
between information in the quantum state ρx,θ = U(x, θ)ρ0U†(x, θ), and the
desired output ^O, using an inner product. In contrast, linear quantum
models allow us to separate the x-dependent quantum operations and θ-
dependent quantum operations within the inner product27. In these models,
we perform data encoding operations followed by tunable gates V(θ). As
shown in Fig. 1(a), a linear quantum neural network (QNN) can be
expressed by,
f ðx; θÞ :¼ Tr VðθÞUðxÞρ0UyðxÞVyðθÞ^O


¼ hρx; ^Oθi:
ð2Þ
Inequation(2),θ cantaketheformofanyotherclassicalparametersthatare
not x; data encoding is expressed by ρx ≔U(x)ρ0U†(x), and the para-
meterized neural net is expressed as ^Oθ :¼ VyðθÞ^OVðθÞ. We note that the
embedding U(x) can be nonlinear transformation of the input data, x.
However, the terminology ‘linear’ quantum model refers to the linearity of
the model with respect to the embedding, i.e. data-dependent and
parameterized components of the quantum algorithm can be separated as
shown above27.
With this structure, we can additionally describe many other types of
quantummachinelearning algorithms. Forexample, we canomit θ entirely,
and recover sophisticated algorithms that focus on data encoding proce-
dures. In quantum kernel methods (QKMs), θ is replaced by training data,
and the algorithm output f during prediction represents a linear combina-
tion of all training samples. Sometimes the action of ρ, U(x) or V(θ) is non-
trivially restricted
to some subset of quantum states. Quantum
convolutional neural networks (QCNNs), quantum generative adversarial
networks, quantum causal modeling, quantum transformers, and quantum
deep reinforcement learning all have regimes in which they reduce to linear
quantum models of the form in Eq. (2) as discussed in Supplementary
Note 1.
Meanwhile, quantum annealing algorithms assume a very speciﬁc type
of quantum computing hardware, namely adiabatic computers, (e.g.
D-Wave) to solve speciﬁc learning tasks. Adiabatic quantum computers can
approximately solve computationally hard (i.e. ‘NP-hard’) problems28
includingapproximatelysolving combinatorialoptimization problems.The
main class of problems encountered in this review relates to quadratic
unconstrained binary optimization (QUBO). Examples of QUBO optimi-
zation problems include regression, classiﬁcation, and data compression
tasks. Classical, quantum and hybrid annealers can all approximately solve
QUBO optimizationproblems29,orbeusedto drawsamplesfromparticular
types of probability distributions (e.g. Boltzmann distributions)30. While
more general forms of adiabatic quantum computing than annealing
techniquesdoexist,wedidnotencounteranywithinourincludedliterature,
and for this reason have not included a discussion of this form of learning.
Quantum algorithms for QUBO formulations have provable advan-
tage over classical counterparts in some regimes. Quantum QUBO algo-
rithms for optimizing support vector machines (SVMs) and balanced
k-means clustering have better computational complexities compared to
classical counterparts, while quantum algorithms for QUBO formulations
of regression have equivalent computational complexity to classical
algorithms28. For this limited class of problems, quantum adiabatic com-
puters, suchas D-Wave 2X processors, can access ≈1000 qubits, which is an
order of magnitude larger than O(100) qubit processors for universal non-
annealingquantumcomputers developedbyIBMand Google. We also note
that it is possible to realize quantumannealingtasksongate-based quantum
computers, e.g. ref. 31, and therefore our classiﬁcation represents one choice
of a non-exclusive method for framing the discussion of QML algorithms.
So far we have introduced quantum machine learning algorithms in
generality without reference to the dataset under consideration. However,
characteristics of classical data and the representation of this data in a
quantum algorithm can affect potential attainability of computational
advantageinsolvinginferencetasks32,33.Dataencodingdescribestheprocess
of representing classical data as quantum states, such as the choice of a data
encoder, U(x), in Fig. 1. Data encoding is required for both annealing and
non-annealing quantumalgorithms. Ideally, data encoders must be efﬁcient
in computational complexity in both circuit size (number of qubits) and
circuit depth (numberof parallel operations). There are a numberof ways to
embed classical data x in quantum states, as summarized in Table 1. For
continuous variable inputs, one may use binary representation of data to
ﬁnite precision τ and encode using discrete methods such as basis encoding,
as reported in Table 1. The growth of the number of computations required
for encoding is mathematically expressed in OðgðnÞÞ-notation to express an
upper bound g(n) on the number of operations as the argument n goes to
inﬁnity, ignoring constant multiplicative or additive factors. As an example
Table 1 | Comparison of data encoding strategies
Encoding
Circuit Size (# of Qubits)
Circuit Depth (Runtime)
Ref.
Angle encoding
O(d)
O(1)
64
Basis encoding
O(dτ)
O(1), O(Ndτ)
64,65
Amplitude encoding
Oðlog2ðdτÞÞ
Oðlog2ðNdτÞÞ; OðNdτÞ
64,65
QRAM
O(dτ + m)
OðlogðmÞÞ
m = O(dτ)34,66
Parallel unary loader
Oð
ﬃﬃﬃ
d
p
Þ
Oð
ﬃﬃﬃ
d
p
log2ðdÞÞ
67
Data encoding vs. circuit size and circuit depth for a data vector x 2 Rd with dimensionality d, a total number of N samples in the database. Suppose the binary representation of a single element of x is of
length τ bits, with an additional bit for storing signs ± 1. Then the binary representation b of x has length d(τ + 1) = O(dτ). Only amplitude encoding has sub-polynomial scaling of number of qubits with number
of classical bits required to represent input data. Runtime complexity refers to the number of parallel quantum operations during encoding. For basis encoding, a single data vector can be encoded in
constant time68 but linear time is required to prepare a superposition over N samples69. For amplitude encoding, runtime is linear for general datasets but can be reduced to sub-polynomial scaling only for
restricted datasets or by enabling an algorithm to access QRAM using an additional m ancillary qubits under idealized conditions65,66.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-025-01597-z
Article
npj Digital Medicine |  (2025) 8:237 
3

from Table 1, angle-encoding can be prepared in constant depth but scales
linearly with number of qubits. The trade-off is switched for amplitude
encoding, which in general scales linearly with runtime and logarithmically
with qubit number.
Hardware-speciﬁc considerations can change implementation details
of a quantum algorithm. The decomposition of required quantum opera-
tions to the native set of quantum gates available on hardware may change
the number of operations, e.g. replacing one 2-qubit gate with a decom-
position involving several single and 2-qubit gates. Similarly, hardware
implementationofanycontinuousvariableoftenalsoincursﬁniteprecision.
Inmostcases,thesechangesaremultiplicativeoradditivewithproblemsize.
These multiplicative or additive changes do not affect the overall asymptotic
scaling behavior of the encoder. Some data encoders are not intended as a
near-term, implementable strategy. For example, quantum random access
memories (QRAM)34 use an additional m = O(dτ) ancillary qubits to ran-
domly access superpositions of basis-encoded states in favorable logarith-
mic OðlogðmÞÞ time. However, robust QRAMs remain extremely
challenging to implement on hardware35. Finally, the parallel unary encoder
assumes speciﬁc hardware capabilities that affect the complexity of data
encoding, and we return to this point in the Discussion.
Distinct from the choice of data encoding strategy, data pre-processing
is concerned with using classical techniques to clean up, rescale, compress,
or transform data. Since data encoding is expensive in quantum resources,
and may impact performance, raw data is pre-processed before encoding
data in quantum states. Data pre-processing can have many goals, e.g. to
compressrawdata,identifykeyfeatures,oraddressmissingvalues.Formost
near-term demonstrations of QML, it is well known that dimensionality
reduction of classical datasets is often required to encode data into small or
intermediate scale quantum circuits. However, the potential impact of data
pre-processing on comparisons of quantum vs. classical algorithm perfor-
mance is not addressed in literature.
Wenowturntopresentingourkeyresultsandthemethodologyforour
review.Thestructureofthisdocumentisasfollows.Webeginbyconducting
meta-analysis and synthesizing the empirical evidence for all eligible studies
in Results. We comment on the extent to whichthis evidencebase addresses
our research questions, and discuss limitations and future outlook in Dis-
cussion. Details of our systematic review methodology, including a study
quality assessment framework and comprehensive search and screening
criteria, is outlined in Methods.
Results
Results are presented in two stages. Firstly, we depictresults of the screening
processandthestudyqualityappraisal,whichhasledtoafocuson16studies
for ﬁnal synthesis. Secondly, we summarize synthesized evidence and dis-
cuss the extent to which our original research question is addressed.
Characterization of synthesized studies
Our systematic review is summarized by a PRISMA diagram in Fig. 2a. Our
searches identiﬁed 4915 distinct studies. A total of 313 studies passed title
and abstract screening and went through full-text screening, of which 169
met eligibility criteria. Inter-rater reliability as measured by Cohen’s kappa
was substantial for title and abstract screening (0.72) and moderate for full
text screening (0.48). According to the distribution of exclusion reasons
shown in Fig. 2b, the most frequent cause for full-text exclusion during
screening was distinguishing between genuinely quantum algorithms
designed to run on quantum hardware, vs. classical computation invoking
ideas, insights or jargon from quantum physics. If the health setting of
physics-centric QML studies is not explicit (e.g. for instance36), then these
Fig. 2 | PRISMA diagram. PRISMA diagram
extracted from Covidence60. a Overview of sys-
tematic review from screening to synthesis. Of
4915 studies returned from search in 5 databases,
93.6% of abstracts are deemed ineligible based on
digital health setting and quantum intervention
criteria. During full text review, 144 studies are
excluded, and exclusion reasons are given in (b).
Data is extracted (red box) for 169 eligible studies;
additional quality assessment and selection criteria
is applied to yield a total of 16 studies for ﬁnal
synthesis. b Frequency count of exclusion reasons
for full text review.
(b)
(a)
6003 studies imported
Scopus: 2991, Embase: 1838,
PubMed: 565, IEEE: 544,
arXiv: 65
4915 studies screened
313 full text studies
assessed for eligibility
169 extracted studies
assessed for quality
46 high quality studies
assessed for realistic ops
16 synthesized studies
1088 duplicates
Manually: 8
Covidence: 1080
4602 studies irrelevant
144 studies excluded
123 studies low quality
30 studies used only
ideal sims of QML
Screening
Data extraction
Quantum inspired / not quantum algorithm
61
Quantum sensing
3
Data not EHR-adjacent
42
Study not digital health related
18
Non-reputable publisher / not found
14
Wrong publication type (e.g. review, opinion)
4
Outside search period
2
Wrong intervention
Wrong setting
Wrong study
characteristics
Exclusion reasons
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-025-01597-z
Article
npj Digital Medicine |  (2025) 8:237 
4

studieswillnot be returned in search nor passtitleand abstractscreeningfor
any systematic review.
To address issuesof technicalrigor,we approach data extraction intwo
steps: ﬁrst, the application of the quality assessment criteria, and secondly,
narrowing the focus to studies that investigated realistic operating condi-
tions either via noisy simulations or by testing algorithms on real quantum
hardware. The distribution of quality scores after consensus is reported in
Table 2. Only 6 of 169studiesled to non-trivial and unresolvable differences
in scoring criteria between two independent reviewers, indicating 96.4%
consensus rate for quality assessment scoring. Borderline studiesarise when
a quality score for two of the following three concerns remains unresolved
by reviewers: insufﬁcient performance analysis of classical pre-processing
before data input to quantum algorithm, insufﬁcient performance analysis
of scalability using qubit numbers > O(1), and/or insufﬁcient performance
analysis of choice of data encoding strategy.
The resulting metadata for extracted (synthesized) studies is shown in
thetop(bottom)rowofFig.3.OfalleligiblestudiesinFig.3(toprow),138of
169(81.7%)useonlysimulationsofquantummachinelearningapplications
for digital health without testing on hardware. Where simulations are the
only evidence base in a study, only 7 out of 138 studies use some form of
noisy simulations, while the remaining 131 studies use only ideal simula-
tions. When restricting to synthesized studies in Fig. 3 (bottom row), a
greater proportion of studies do appear to test quantum algorithms on
actual quantum hardware (refer Fig. 3b vs. (f)).
The growth in the number of eligible articles on quantum algorithms
for digital health seems almost exponential in Fig. 3a. These applications are
broadly categorized into diagnosis, predictive health, and ‘other’ in Fig. 3c.
‘Diagnosis’ refers to an application that identiﬁes, characterizes or labels
current health data with the aim of supporting a clinical diagnosis e.g.
classiﬁcation of medical images or time varying signals. ‘Predictive’ refers to
an application that predicts future health information based on current
health data, notnecessarilytosupportformulationof a clinicaldiagnosise.g.
predicting drug efﬁcacy or disease/risk factors. All remaining applications
are grouped under ‘other` e.g. generating synthetic ECG signals based on
EHR/EMR data. In Fig. 3d, we observe that the majority of studies did not
enablecodeanddataaccessibilitywhicharetypicallybothrequiredtoenable
testsofreproducibility.Fortheﬁnalsetofsynthesizedstudiescorresponding
to Fig. 3h, all available datasets and code are summarized in Supplementary
Note 3.
Empirical evidence from synthesized studies
Nearly all of our synthesized studies were concerned with a learning task of
performing a clinical diagnosis or a clinical prediction based on classical
datasets. From a clinical perspective, all studies rationalized quantum
algorithm design by citing other empirical literature. Any empirical ratio-
nale for the choice of quantum intervention did not necessarily refer back to
comparable clinical settings: in most cases, it appeared that the matching
between health datasets and quantum interventions was either ad-hoc, or
one tried all possible quantuminterventions in ordertoempirically discover
the best performing models for a ﬁxed health dataset. No QML applications
were focussedonhealth service delivery, publichealth,and consumerhealth
monitoring applications. Only one study, Qu (2023)37, focussed on health-
data analytics applications, namely, that QGANs may be beneﬁcial in
ameliorating issues of model collapse for synthetic data generation in digital
health applications, but these are untested at scale in both simulations and
quantum hardware. No studies were related to improving efﬁcacy or
Table 2 | Study quality assessment criteria and scoring
Study quality appraisal
Counts
Q1: Explains quantum algorithm selection by referencing learning problem class or dataset structure
0 : No theory or empirical rationale for quantum algorithm selection discussed or cited
32
1 : Quantum algorithm selection is empirical or mostly cites empirical literature
115
2 : Quantum algorithm selection is linked to underlying class of learning problem or data structure
21
3 : Quantum algorithm has provable advantage with respect to class of learning problem or data structure
1
Q2: Identiﬁes/discusses impact of data encoding on quantum algorithm performance
0 : Encoding methodology omitted or incomplete
38
0 : Impact of different encoding strategies on overall performance is not analyzed
85
1 : Performance impact is discussed with incomplete analysis (e.g. compares at least 2 methods)
37
2 : Performance impact is well characterized empirically or theoretically
7
Not applicable
2
Q3: Identiﬁes/discusses impact of classical input data processing on quantum algorithm performance
0 : Data pre-processing methodology is omitted or incomplete
18
0 : Impact of different data pre-processing strategies on overall performance is not analyzed
96
1 : Performance impact is discussed with incomplete analysis (e.g. compares at least 2 methods)
45
2 : Performance impact is well characterized empirically or theoretically
7
Not applicable (no classical input data processing)
3
Q4: (EMPIRICAL ONLY) Dimensionality of data input for quantum algorithm
0 : Not reported or discussed; or unclear
31
0 : Negligible i.e. O(1)
102
1 : Small i.e. O(10)
30
2 : Intermediate i.e. O(102)
3
3 : Large i.e. O(103) or greater
2
Not applicable (theory study)
1
Score distribution for study quality assessment applied to 169 eligible studies at extraction. Each study was scored independently by two reviewers. Consensus scores reﬂect agreed values formed by
discussion with a view to taking the maximum possible of two scores where differences in interpretation were trivial.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-025-01597-z
Article
npj Digital Medicine |  (2025) 8:237 
5

efﬁciency of health service delivery, e.g. optimization problems for patient
ﬂow, or operational cost-down in hospitals.
We ﬁnd that quantum kernel methods and quantum annealing tech-
niques dominate our synthesized evidence in Fig. 4 (top). The choice of
quantum intervention typically then informs the choice of classical com-
parator (middle) within each study, and hencethe distributions of quantum
and classical algorithms are correlated. Finally we note that datasets (bot-
tom) are not particularly clinically diverse and factorize into private and
open-source datasets. While EHR and hospital data are often private, the
remaining datasets are all open-source. Most empirical evidence does not
use electronic health records, but gravitates to a handful of open-source
health databases. We thus ﬁnd that the diversity of applications investigated
empirically is limited.
In Fig. 5, we report performance metrics from synthesized studies
comparing quantum interventions with classical machine learning coun-
terparts for different digital health applications. The choice of quantum
algorithms again separates into two groups: annealing vs. gate-based tech-
niques. Indeed, quantum annealing studies focus on digital health tasks that
canbe mapped to a QUBO problem,and are able to scale to problem sizes at
least an order of magnitude larger in qubit number than non-annealing
quantumhardware.Ontheotherhand,gate-basednon-annealingquantum
hardware accommodates a broader range of QML algorithms, as shown by
the remaining rows in Fig. 5, and a broader range of hardware platforms,
such as trapped ions (IonQ) and superconducting qubits (Rigetti, IBM).
However, hardware experiments in many instances are almost outdated e.g.
IBM quantum processors (56.2% of synthesized studies) are Falcon models
or older despite the availability of processors with 100+ qubits since 2022.
We compare quantum vs. classical machine learning by reporting
selected metrics from sixteen synthesized studies in the remaining columns
of Fig. 5. Of these, ﬁve studies do not provide sufﬁcient information to
address our review question. Das (2023)38, Kawaguchi (2023)39 and Qu
(2023)37 do not report numerical metrics for quantum experiments, while
Yano (2020)40 and Landman (2022)41 report numerical quantum
benchmarks but do not report a numerical classical comparator. The
remaining 11 studies reported in Fig. 5 reveal major issues in facilitating the
comparison between quantum vs. classical interventions. There are three
scientiﬁcally concerning ﬂaws:
1. No empirical evidence of performance scaling: All quantum comput-
ing demonstrations, even in simulations, have not been carried out at
scale. Leaving aside the issue of quantum advantage for classical
datasets, empirical investigations on universal, gate-based quantum
computers have not investigated performance as a function of
increasing problem size or qubit number e.g. to O(100) qubits. Even
for these small-scale experiments on universal, gate-based platforms,
only Krunic (2022)19 plotted trend lines of performance vs. problem
size / qubit number to establish empirical scaling behavior. In all other
cases, including annealing applications, algorithmic performance
scaling was not established in ideal or noisy simulations or prior to
running on quantum hardware.
2. Limited reporting of statistical uncertainties: All studies provided
limited or no discussion of how statistical ﬂuctuations in test scores
should be interpreted. Only Kazdaghli (2024) estimates and reports
sample error bars for test score values42, while Krunic (2022) proposed
a technique to contextualize ﬂuctuations in performance score to the
underlying conﬁguration of experiments using PTRI metrics19 but in
lieu of uncertaintyanalysis.In the absence of errorbars, any differences
in classical vs. quantum performance appeared to be statistically
equivalent ﬂuctuations for a range of conﬁgurations.
3. Lack of noise characterization and impact of quantum hardware: Most
studiesrecognizethesigniﬁcantlylargedeteriorationbetweenidealand
actual quantum hardware performance due to the effect of noise.
Despite this, studies compared quantum hardware performance
mostly only with ideal simulations, rather than using noisy simulations
or secondary data to provide insight into algorithm performance on
hardware. Only two synthesized studies38,43 used noisy simulations to
Quantum hardware
Medical setting
Code accessible?
Extracted studies
Synthesized studies
(a)
(e)
(b)
(f)
(c)
(g)
(d)
(h)
n=169
n=16
Fig. 3 | High-level characteristics of eligible and synthesized studies. Data
extraction for eligible studies in Fig. 2, with n = 169, 16 for number of studies
extracted (a–d) or synthesized (e–h), respectively. Synthesized studies exclude eli-
gible studies that do not meet our quality criteria or rely solely on ideal simulations.
a, e Histogram of number of studies by publication year; eligible studies show rapid
increase in number by year in (a) while synthesized studies appear more uniformly
distributed in (e). b, f Percentage of studies that mentioned using quantum hardware
using either health or non-health datasets. ‘None’ in (b) indicates usage of both ideal
and noisy simulations, while ‘None’ in (f) indicates only noisy simulations of
quantum computers. c, g Percentage of studies summarized by digital health setting,
broadly characterized as aiding clinical diagnosis (‘Diagnosis’), enabling predictive
health (‘Predictive’), and ‘Other’. d, h Number of studies providing open access to
software code and input datasets. The absence of code/data availability statements,
statements ‘upon reasonable request’, broken links or unusable repositories are all
categorized as ‘No’ above.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-025-01597-z
Article
npj Digital Medicine |  (2025) 8:237 
6

compare to hardware results in their analysis. When running algo-
rithms on quantum hardware, only two studies38,44 explicitly con-
sidered error mitigation. Of these, only one study used an application-
agnostic error mitigation technique and distinguished between raw vs.
mitigated results to contextualize the impact of noise44. All studies
failed to take data to characterize performance of the underlying
quantum hardware while running QML experiments. Consequently,
these studies offer almost no insight into whether ﬂuctuations in
classical vs. quantum QML performance are entirely dominated by
drift in performance of underlying quantum hardware.
In summary of evidence presented in all synthesized studies, we deem
that the performance differentials between quantum and classical machine
learningmetricsfordigitalhealthreportedinFig.5arenegligible.Notonlyis
empirical evidence difﬁcult to synthesize and interpret, but the tabulated
performance scores show no clear, consistent, statistically signiﬁcant trend
to support any empirical claims of quantum utility in digital health across a
range of hardware platforms.
Discussion
We have discussed until this point why a meta-analysis of empirical evi-
dence in synthesized studies is insufﬁcient for claiming empirical quantum
utility for quantum machine learning in digital health. This absence of
empirical evidence may be understandable in a relatively new ﬁeld where
applications development may temporally lag new insights in quantum
machine learning theory and new hardware capabilities. We now consider
these observations on research methodology and themes below.
Even in a discipline that must rely on heuristics and empirical inves-
tigations, the majority of studies claim empirical quantum advantage but do
not take into account realistic operating conditions in their analysis. The
absence of noise characterization or noisy simulations to explain deviations
of quantum hardware experiments from idealized conditions is particularly
Fig. 4 | Overview of quantum interventions, classical comparators and datasets
for synthesized evidence. Distribution of quantum interventions, classical com-
parators and health data setting for all 16 synthesized studies (columns), including
studies with borderline or weak consensus (shaded gray columns). For each study,
we indicate primary quantum interventions (top), classical comparators (middle),
and digital health datasets (bottom). Quantum interventions deployed on non-
digital health datasets are excluded. Interventions or comparators (rows) combine
similar multiple-choice data extraction entries. QNNs exclude QCNNs and no
VQCs / PQCs were found to contain mid-circuit measurements or adaptive gates.
All sixteen studies, including any available codebases and datasets, are compiled in
Supplementary Note 3.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-025-01597-z
Article
npj Digital Medicine |  (2025) 8:237 
7

surprising. In 14 out of 16 studies, hardware results were compared to ideal
simulations without any noise characterization or the use of noise simula-
tions to contextualize results. Ofthe two studiesthat used noise simulations,
these simulations were limited to simple noise models. For example, in Qu
(2023)37, QGANs are used for synthetic heartbeat data generation. Ideal
QGANs converged to accuracies ranging from 87.7% – 90.9% for different
types of heartbeat data. Standard noise simulations of bit-ﬂip, phase-ﬂip,
amplitude damping and depolarizing noise at moderately strong levels
reduced the range of accuracies to ≈75% – 90%, where each noise model is
individually considered. However, in realistic settings, these noise models
Fig. 5 | Summary of quantum vs. classical performance metrics for synthesized
evidence. Selected test scores (accuracy, AUC and squared error ∈[0, 1]) reported
for quantum interventions deployed under realistic operating conditions using
health data. Ranges reﬂected min and max test scores attained over different
experimental conﬁgurations reported in each study; error bars for each test score are
shown if originally reported. Synthesized studies with strong (weak) consensus are
shaded in green (gray). Best possible scores for accuracy, ﬁdelity and AUC metrics
(unity) differ from squared error metrics (zero). Performance benchmarks that
cannot be easily compared or interpreted alongside other metrics, or are not con-
sistently reported, e.g. F1 scores and precision, are excluded for readability. NA Not
applicable. NR Not reported. Est. Estimates of numerical values implied from visual/
graphical data.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-025-01597-z
Article
npj Digital Medicine |  (2025) 8:237 
8

are inadequate—at the very least, requiring a mixture of different error
types. While similar noise simulations were used as evidence to show noise-
robustnessofQMLmethods,thelimitednatureofthesenoisemodelswould
not reﬂect realistic operating conditions.
Indeed the ﬁeld appears to lack empirical comparisons of quantum
annealing vs. gate-based QML in regimes where quantum annealing is
anticipated to have provable quantum advantage, e.g. for speciﬁc learning
tasks such as binary classiﬁcation. Four studies formulated learning tasks as
QUBO problems and used a quantum annealer. Two of these studies
focussed on classiﬁcation tasks using a support vector machine29,30, which
could be easily compared with a universal gate-based computer. The
remaining two studies focussed on areas such as linear regression45 and data
compression46 for which there does not appear to be provable computa-
tional advantage for quantum annealing. Since D-Wave architectures have
been available for some time before newer quantum processors, two of these
four studies represent our oldest publications dating back to 2018. All
annealing studies are also subject to study considerations above, and our
review did not ﬁnd strong evidence of quantum annealers outperforming
either newer gate-based, universal quantum computers or classical
counterparts.
Only one synthesized study used electronic health records as opposed
to generic digital health data. In Krunic (2022)19, electronic health records
were used to perform kernel-based prediction of six-month persistence of
rheumatoid arthritis patients on biologic therapies. Both quantum and
classical kernels were compared for different conﬁgurations of number of
features and number of samples of training data. The study offers weak
evidence of empirical quantum advantage when the conﬁguration space is
restrictedtosmalldimensionaldatasetswithalownumberoffeatures.Aside
fromdirectlyusingelectronichealthrecords,Kazdaghli(2024)42focussedon
using quantum interventions for data imputation in clinical data, applicable
to the analysis of electronic health records, but also other types of clinical
data, such as those used in clinical trials. Meanwhile, some eligible but not
synthesized studies discussed the use of quantum algorithms for securely
pooling health data in federated learning applications47.
Some of the quantum algorithms encountered in this review cited
signiﬁcantimprovements in data-encodingcompared to typical approaches
outlined in the Introduction. Efﬁcient image processing tasks are pursued
using quantum transformers in Cherrat (2024)48 and Landman (2022)41,
while data imputation is pursued in Kazdaghli (2024)42. While these
applicationsin digitalhealthdiffer,theunderlyingtechnologiesin Landman
(2022)41, Cherrat (2024)48, and Kazdaghli (2024)42 all rely on methods in
ref. 49 and appear to inherit favorable resource scaling from assuming
speciﬁc hardware capabilities that do not exist generally. The underlying
data encoders assume hardware can implement entangling gates on over-
lapping sets of qubits in parallel (as opposed to sequentially). This hardware
capability is so-far only shown for small-scale trapped ions50 and it is not
expected to scale to systems with large qubit number.
Meanwhile health data consists of both continuous and discrete data
and Yano (2020)40 ﬁlls an existing gap in literature by looking at encoding of
discrete variable data into quantum VQCs using Quantum Random Access
Coding (QRAC). The authors argue that Oðlog2ðdτÞÞ=2 improvement in
circuit size complexity can be attained for discrete variable inputs, sug-
gesting a two-fold improvement over amplitude scaling in Table 1.
Nevertheless, the critical challenge for amplitude encoding strategies in
QML is that linear runtime complexity can prohibit accessing super-
polynomial advantage and this barrier is not addressed by the paper.
Nearly all quantum algorithms were linear quantum models. Some
theoretical evidence shows that linear quantum models will require expo-
nentially more qubits than non-linear models27, and heuristic evidence
shows that certain types of linear quantum models will not be useful for the
analysis of classical datasets17. Even broadening to a larger pool of 169
eligible studies, non-linear quantum models were not encountered. Of our
synthesized studies, seven studies used linear quantum kernel methods
including Moradi (2022, 2023)43,44, Yano (2020)40, Aswiga (2024)51, Krunic
(2022)19 and Kawaguchi (2023)39. For non-kernel methods, the underlying
technologies for Nirula (2021)52, Qu (2023)37 and Das (2023)38 can be recast
in linear form. Finally, the quantum transformers and data encoding stra-
tegies that yield favorable scaling properties in Cherrat (2024)48, Landman
(2022)41, and Kazdaghli (2024)42 use methods developed in ref. 49. Aside
from a variant proposed in Cherrat (2024), the data encoders and neural
networks leveraged by these studies all appear to be described by the fra-
mework of linear quantum models. Indeed, the observed absence of clear,
consistent performance trends in the empirical meta-analysis of the pre-
vious section could in part be explained by the underlying linear quantum
modelsusedformanyofthestudies.Afterpublishingourpre-print,wewere
made aware of ref. 53 as an improvement of quantum methods in Landman
2022 and Cherrat 2024, consisting of a non-linear model in Fig. 1d. While
ref. 53 fails our inclusion criteria, even its inclusion would not affect the
overall conclusions of our review.
Despite the fact that all quantum models were trained by a supervised
learning problem, no study explicitly characterized their optimization
landscape. Itiswellknownthatoptimizationof supervisedQML algorithms
can be plagued by exponentially vanishing gradients (barren plateaus)54,
exponential concentration of kernel values55, or exponentially concentrated
local minima56. However only two out of sixteen synthesized studies men-
tioned optimization challenges associated with their proposed methods for
supervised quantum machine learning. Here, Cherrat (2024)48 and Land-
man (2022)41 stated that their proposed QML methods’ structures may
avoid barren plateaus. All studies failed to provide a systematic character-
ization of their empirical optimization landscape, and the resources utilized
by their chosen optimization protocol in practice. Meanwhile no substantial
improvements are found in reducing shot number requirements for QML
applications considered in this review.
Finally, classical data preprocessing tasks are highly discretionary and
impact on QML is poorly understood. There are two areas where data
preprocessing is frequently used in QML: feature selection for kernel
methods, and dimensionality reduction for data encoding. In feature
selection, both the number of features43, and statistical signiﬁcance of fea-
tures were established using statistical tests44 to aid kernel design. Mean-
while, dimensionality reduction is required to encode data on quantum
hardware with limited qubit numbers, e.g. by cropping, PCA or LDA.
However, the impact of dimensionality reduction on QML performance is
unaddressed. For example, reducing images to 2n length, where the number
of qubits n is small,riskscreatingduplication in training and testingdatasets
if two different full-sized images become identical after dimensionality
reduction. Other preprocessing tasks include re-scaling, using statistical
summaries, or transforming data, e.g. using Haralick features57 or Fourier
methods, but there has been no characterization of the impact of these
methods on investigations of empirical quantum advantage.
Our review highlights that the language of quantum advantage,
empirical quantum utility, speed-up, or resource efﬁciencies are poorly
deﬁned and frequently abused notions in literature. QML applications
development could beneﬁt from guidelines on what robust quantum vs.
classical comparisons look like. Even leaving aside the issue of how to
select the best classical comparator, comparing computational cost
improvements enabled by quantum algorithms can be a difﬁcult task. As
discussed in the Introduction, computational costs are theoretically
quantiﬁed by sample complexity number of queries or time complexity
(number of sequential operations). As examples, for sample complexity,
one must ensure that information contained in each query or sample
must be comparable across algorithms. Meanwhile for time complexity,
operations contain assumptions about hardware capabilities and these
assumptions are not always explicitly stated nor consistent. As eluci-
dated by our discussion on quantum transformers in our review, studies
assume that groups of quantum operations can be parallelized. This
assumption is not hardware-agnostic nor scale-agnostic: certain quan-
tum operations may be parallelized in certain small-scale architectures
but not in others. A comprehensive review on the approaches for
benchmarking quantum performance is thus of immediate urgency and
interest.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-025-01597-z
Article
npj Digital Medicine |  (2025) 8:237 
9

In the absenceof theoretical assurances on complexity, we have seen in
Fig. 5 how empirical studies use performance metrics such as ﬁdelity or
accuracy to argue for the ‘utility’ of quantum algorithms in information
processing tasks. We have discussed how arguments of empirical utility or
advantage must demonstrate both scalability and robustness of perfor-
mance. Since approximately simulating 100 qubits can be within reach of
classical computers, we argue that characterizing properties of QML algo-
rithms as a function of system size is more important than reporting any
single ﬁgure of merit at some arbitrary choice of system size. Secondly,
relying solely on ideal simulations offers no insight into robustness, and one
simple test of robustness is to understand and mitigate the impact of noise.
Thirdly, we ﬁnd that the choice of performance metrics in empirical studies
isdiverse,oftenad-hoc,andlimitshowtoperformmeta-analysisofevidence
in the ﬁeld.
We summarize these and other considerations to specify minimum
requirements for the robust analysis of quantum algorithms on classical
datasets. Our proposed qualitative framework is presented in Table 3. This
framework is complementary to the quality analysis framework used in this
review. In our framework, the minimum requirements outlined in Table 3
(column 3) can be immediately met. However, many of the ideal require-
ments in Table 3 (column 4) may require new research due to the nascency
of the ﬁeld. Indeed, the ﬁeld has made some progress towards these ideal
requirements: challenges of technical reproducibility in QML are discussed
in ref. 16 and quantum algorithm performance has been linked closely with
hardwarebenchmarkinginref.58.However,researchgapscontinuetoexist,
forexample,inthelackofaprincipledapproachtolinkquantumalgorithms
to structures in classical data, to select appropriate performance metrics, to
use noise characterization tools to set performance expectations and
benchmark algorithm performance on hardware, and/or to compare
quantum methods with a repository of best-in-class classical benchmarks
for industry subdomains. Further development and testing of the proposed
frameworkisbothurgentandimportanttourgebetterempiricalevidencein
our nascent ﬁeld. Finally, we note that our review methodology is future-
proof: by changing only the search period, we may provide a systematic
update on the quality of research evidence for QML in digital health.
To conclude, digital health aims to transform access, affordability and
quality of healthcare. As classical machine learning methods in health
approach commercialization, we ﬁnd an exponentially growing number of
studies advocating the use of QML in health. Our workis theﬁrst systematic
review that examines the strength of empirical evidence to support these
claims using a database of 4915 studies. We ﬁnd most applications are
focussed on clinical decision support and comparatively little attention is
given to health service delivery and public health use-cases. Of eligible
studies, we appraise study quality yielding 16 robust studies which analyze
QML applications in realistic operating environments. Despite this, we ﬁnd
that synthesized empirical evidence does not establish clear trends in per-
formance beneﬁts of QML algorithms over classical methods. Even leaving
aside the issue of classical comparators, this synthesized evidence addi-
tionallydoesnotestablishscalabilityorrobustnessofQMLperformance.To
this end, we propose minimal requirements for empirical studies for
claiming empirical advantage for QML algorithms. We reiterate that
enabling meaningful use-case discovery for QML in digital health requires
new research to rationalize the choice of QML structures on classical
datasets, deﬁne appropriate benchmarks, and establish performance scaling
under realistic operating conditions. An update to the search period of our
review enablesus to systematically track changes in this evidence base in the
near future.
Methods
Our
systematic
review
is
registered
on
PROSPERO
(ID:
CRD42024562024)59. Screening and data extraction were performed in
Covidence60. Commonly used nomenclature encountered in this review is
summarized in Supplementary Note 4.
Search strategy
Our search strategy is formed by decomposing our research question into
elements of the SPICE framework23, as summarized in Table 4. Only articles
published after 2015 were included, as the ﬁrst commercially-available
quantum computer was made accessible in 201661 and digitization of health
information into electronic records1 is relatively recent. Hence both factors
prohibit meaningful applications development prior to this date. Search
syntax was reﬁned by trial and error on PubMed (Table 4) in consultation
with a health research librarian, and adapted to other databases (Embase,
Scopus, arXiv and IEEE, refer Supplementary Note 5). Key articles were
identiﬁed as litmus tests to sense check database-speciﬁc search term stra-
tegies. Searches were conducted from 10 May to 10 June 2024.
Inclusion/exclusion criteria
The eligibility criteria for the screening process is summarized in Table 5.
Our study setting prioritized digital health data sources that consist of
electronic medical records (EMRs) or electronic health records (EHRs).
EMRs represent a real-time patient health record that collects, stores, and
displays clinical information as the foundation of a digital hospital as
opposed to an EHR which displays summarized patient information to the
Table 3 | Proposed framework for QML study design
Analysis component
Current state
Minimum requirement
Ideal requirement
Algorithm design linked
to classical dataset
There is no link between choice of
quantum algorithm and underlying health
dataset
Rationalize quantum algorithm design
based on properties of health dataset
Provide theoretical performance guarantees of
quantum algorithm performance on speciﬁc health
datasets
Empirical performance
analysis
Typically studies use an arbitrary
performance metric for arbitrary system
size. Metric typically reported without
error bars
Test performance metrics for
increasing system size to establish
scaling, and estimate standard error
Use standardized protocols for showing scalable
QML performance and uncertainty analysis
Noise robustness
Typically studies do not consider noise, or
whether performance recovers after using
error suppression or mitigation
Conduct basic noisy simulations using
depolarizing noise, measurement
error, and amplitude damping
Conduct realistic noise simulations using hardware-
relevant parameters; show efﬁcacy of mitigation
techniques
Sensitivity analysis
Performance sensitivity to perturbations in
overall protocol is typically untested
Test sensitivity of performance metric
to changes to pre-processing / post-
processing of classical data
Test sensitivity of performance metric to changes to
dataset size, training data noise, initialization,
optimization, and other hyperparameters (if
applicable)
Reproducibility
Health data access is not always provided.
Even if data is provided, the code is not
accessible.
Provide access to all data and code to
reproduce results
Minimal requirements for future QML study design, complementing the quality assessment framework used in our review (c.f. Table 2), and subject to further testing.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-025-01597-z
Article
npj Digital Medicine |  (2025) 8:237 
10

Table 4 | Global search strategy for all databases
Setting
Intervention
Comparison*
Evaluation
In developing digital health analytics
could QC & QML algorithms
potentially outperform existing
classical methods
in efﬁcacy or efﬁciency?
"medical records"[MeSH Terms]
OR “electronic health records"[MeSH Terms]
OR “electronic health record*"[All Fields]
OR “health record*”[All Fields]
OR “medical record*"[All Fields]
OR “clinical record*"[All Fields]
OR ("hospital"[All Fields] AND “data*"[All Fields])
OR ("clinical"[All Fields] AND “data*"[All Fields])
OR ("medical"[All Fields] AND “data*"[All Fields])
OR ("health"[All Fields] AND “data*"[All Fields])
OR ("patient*"[All Fields] AND “data*"[All Fields])
OR “medical history”
OR “Routinely Collected Health Data"[Mesh]
OR “Routinely Collected Health Data"[All Fields]
OR “Administrative Data"[All Fields]
OR “Administrative Health Data" [All Fields]
OR “health information systems"[MeSH Terms]
OR “health services administration"[MeSH Terms]
OR “medical informatics computing"[MeSH Terms]
OR “medical inform*"[All Fields]
OR “radiography"[MeSH Terms]
OR “radiography"[All Fields]
OR ("medical"[All Fields] AND “imaging"[All Fields])
OR “medical imaging"[All Fields]
OR “diagnostic imaging"[MeSH Terms]
OR ("diagnostic"[All Fields] AND “imaging"[All Fields])
OR “diagnostic imaging"[All Fields]
OR “radiography"[MeSH Terms]
OR “electrocardiography"[MeSH Terms]
OR “ecg"[All Fields]
OR “electrocardiography"[MeSH Terms]
OR “ekg"[All Fields]
OR “radiograph*”
OR “magnetic resonance imaging"[MeSH Terms]
OR ("magnetic"[All Fields] AND “resonance"[All Fields])
OR “magnetic resonance imaging"[All Fields]
OR “mri"[All Fields]
OR “ nuclear magnetic resonance imaging”
OR “coherence tomography"
OR “optical coherence tomography”
OR “computer assisted tomography”
OR “uss"[All Fields]
OR “ct"[All Fields]
OR “computed tomography"[All Fields]
OR “ultrasound*”
OR “echography”
OR “x rays"[MeSH Terms]
OR “x rays"[All Fields]
OR “xray"[All Fields]
OR “mammogra*”
OR “holography”
OR “electroencephalography"[MeSH Terms]
OR “electroencephalography"[All Fields]
OR “eeg"[All Fields]
OR “radiology”[Title/Abstract]
OR “laboratory data”
OR “laboratory test*”
OR “biostatistics”[Title/Abstract]
OR epigenomics[Mesh]
OR “epigenom*”
OR metabolomics[Mesh]
OR “metabolom*”
OR biomarker[Mesh]
OR transcriptomics[Mesh]
OR “transcriptom*”
OR proteomics[Mesh]
OR “proteom*”
OR genomics[Mesh] OR “genom*”
OR “epiproteom*”
OR “epiomic*”
OR “vaccin*”
OR “gene”
"quantum machine learning”[All
Fields]
OR “quantum comput*”[All
Fields]
OR “quantum inform*”[All Fields]
OR quantum[Title/Abs]
(machine learning[MeSH Terms])
OR “machine learning”
OR algorithm[MeSH Terms]
OR “algorithm*”[All Fields]
OR “Bayes*”[All Fields]
OR “kernel*”[All Fields]
OR “classif*”[All Fields]
OR “neural networks, computer"[MeSH
Terms]
OR “deep learning"[MeSH Terms]
OR (cnn)
OR (svm)
OR (svd)
OR “pca”[Title/Abstract]
OR “principal component analysis”[All
Fields]
OR “reinforcement learning”[All Fields]
OR “k-means”[All Fields]
OR “wavelet”[All Fields]
OR “genetic algorithm*”[All Fields]
OR “neural net*”[All Fields]
OR “support vector*”[All Fields]
OR “random forest*”[All Fields]
OR “Boltzmann mach*”[All Fields]
OR “adversarial net*”[All Fields]
OR “random walk*”[All Fields]
OR “linear regression”[All Fields]
OR “nonlinear regression”[All Fields]
OR “monte carlo method"[MeSH Terms]
OR “Markov chain”[All Fields]
OR “gaussian process regression”[All
Fields]
OR “ChatGPT”
OR “large language models”[All Fields]
OR “artiﬁcial intelligence”[All Fields]
OR “big data” [All Fields]
OR “data pre-processing”[All Fields]
OR “data post-processing”[All Fields]
OR “feature selection”[All Fields]
OR “feature extraction”[All Fields]
OR “predictive model*”[All Fields]
("2015"[Date - Publication] :
“3000"[Date - Publication]) NOT
("systematic review"[pt]
OR “meta-analysis"[pt]
OR “review"[pt]
OR “clinical trial protocol"[pt]
OR “clinical conference"[pt]
OR “case reports"[pt])
Search strategy in the SPICE framework23. Columns represent digital health setting and perspective (S,P), quantum intervention (I), classical comparator (C), and study characteristics for evidence
evaluation(E).Search conceptswithincolumnsare combinedwith logical ‘OR’ statements,whileindependentcolumnsareconcatenatedwith logical ‘AND’ statements.Searchconcept performancediffers
by database e.g. PubMed, Embase (shown above) support reliable MESH explosion of health concepts; while Scopus, arXiv and IEEE instead rely on root word truncation. Complete search syntax
modiﬁcations by database are enclosed in Supplementary Note 5.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-025-01597-z
Article
npj Digital Medicine |  (2025) 8:237 
11

consumer in the community and across multiple health care providers. The
terms “EMR” and “EHR” may be used interchangeably in some countries.
Since health data is subject to strict privacy and security legislation, we also
consider data that could be reasonably considered to be in an EHR or EMR,
thereby permitting the inclusion of open source and published health
datasets that are typically used for proof-of-principle results in both classical
and quantum ML. While EHR/EMR data typically includes medical ima-
ging, laboratory data, time-varying signals and patient information, we also
include genomics data and biomarkers when used in a context where they
supplement a patient’s EHR or EMR for diagnosis or predictive health
applications. A notable exclusion is textual search or analysis of digital or
handwritten clinical notes, as these would imply looking at an entirely
different class of algorithms that have little or no overlap with unstructured
data analysis of non-textual health datasets listed above.
Our criteria also prioritized QML algorithms that were genuinely
intended to be run on quantum computing hardware, and at least
Table 5 | Eligibility criteria for screening
Inclusion
Exclusion
Setting
• electronic medical records, electronic health records, medical records,
health records
• diagnostic or medical imaging or tomography or radiology, (MRI, PET,
CET, CT, USS, XRAY)
• time-varying signals (EEC, EEG, EKG)
• data associated with EHR (biomarkers, genomics, laboratory tests,
medical demographic data)
• digital health, healthcare delivery
• textual or handwritten data in EHRs
• raw data from physical sensors (e.g. raw data prior to image
reconstruction for MRI)
• data not used as part of EMRs / EHRs (e.g. raw bioﬁeld / bio-signal data,
biomarkers, genomics, motor imagery, head movement, facial
expression detection)
•datasets for non-digital health applications (e.g. drug delivery; drug
design, drug/vaccine development, nanomaterials analysis,
computational biology or chemistry calculation; smart buildings, smart
devices, smart healthcare infrastructure or systems management; data
mining, intrusion detection, watermarking, encryption, authentication,
transmission, storage or retrieval of health data, data anonymization or
privacy; or medical imaging hardware, wearable health devices,
scanning devices)
• text-based analysis of handwritten or digital textual data
Persp.
• healthcare delivery (public, private), hospital and medical centers
(administration, data, service delivery), clinical service delivery, patient
ﬂow
• health-speciﬁc data sharing for ML / QML
• health suppliers
• public service delivery unrelated to health
• ﬁnancial sustainability of public health
Intervention
• quantum machine learning, quantum computing, quantum computers
• quantum algorithm, quantum-enhanced algorithms, hybrid quantum
classical algorithms
• quantum circuits, variational quantum circuits, parametrized quantum
circuits, variational quantum algorithms, variational quantum
eigensolvers
• Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm (QAOA)
• quantum neural nets QNN, quantum convolutional neural nets QCNN,
quanvolutional quantum algorithm
• quantum generative (adversarial) networks QGANs, quantum genetic
algorithms, quantum evolutionary algorithms
• dequantization
• quantum Monte Carlo, Markov chain techniques
• quantum random walks
• quantum k-means, quantum clustering
• quantum kernel methods
• quantum PCA
• quantum SVM
• quantum tensor network states, QNNs based on tensor networks
• quantum transfer learning, quantum reinforcement learning
• Quantum Long Short Term Memory
• quantum integer wavelet transforms, quantum wavelet transforms
• quantum-inspired algorithms, quantum-inspired clustering (quantum
gray wolf, quantum fruit ﬂy, quantum particle swarm, quantum ant lion,
quantum squirrel search, quantum bat, quantum whale, quantum
grasshopper, quantum artiﬁcial bee colony, quantum avian navigation,
quantum marine predator, quantum seagull algorithms)
• quantum algorithms for textual search, sequence search, or sequence
alignment
• quantum iterative reconstruction algorithm
• quantum particle swarm optimization
• quantum inspired evolutionary algorithm
• quantum inspired genetic algorithm
• quantum key distribution, quantum cryptography, quantum-safe
classical algorithms, quantum communication, steganography
• quantum dots or nano materials, quantum yield, quantum efﬁciency
metrics
• quantum noise in medical imaging, photon counting in medical imaging
• quantum sensing, quantum metrology, quantum magnetometers,
ptychography
• quantum mechanics for computational biology or chemistry calculations
• quantum mechanical calculations or simulations, quantum chemical
calculations or simulations
• generic quantum physics, consciousness, psychosomatic, quantum
consciousness quantum-inspired algorithms
• quantum security, encryption, block chain, authentication
• colloquial use of “quantum” e.g. ‘quantum leap’, ‘quantum step’,
‘quantum of’
Comparison
Only apply this at extraction
• classical machine learning inc. deep, reinforcement & unsupervised
learning
• classiﬁers, classiﬁcation, kernel methods, neural networks, SVM, PCA,
tensor networks
• generative algorithms, genetic algorithms, Monte Carlo, Markov chain
techniques, random walks, random forests
• regression, ﬁltering, Bayesian analysis, Long Short Term Memory
• wavelets, Hadamard transforms, Fourier analysis
Only apply this at extraction
• image reconstruction algorithms
• image denoising algorithms
• speckle reduction
• federated learning applications for security, data privacy and
authentication
• methods/algorithms/computational analysis for non-digital health
applications (see Setting)
Eval.
Only apply this at extraction
• High quality articles
Only apply this at extraction
• Low quality articles
Study
• Peer reviewed articles, research papers after 2015
• Publication date 2015 - present
• Reviews or technical reports; irrelevant modes (e.g. conference
abstracts, book chapters, lecture notes, clinical trials, patents,
observational studies) or publication before 2015
Eligibility criteria for title and abstract screening and full text review. Columns represent inclusion/exclusion criteria, while rows are elements of SPICE framework aligned with search strategy in Table 4.
Criteria for digital health setting, quantum interventions, and study characteristics were applied during title and abstract screen and full text review. Meanwhile, criteria for classical comparators and
evaluating technical robustness were only applied after data extraction and prior to synthesis.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-025-01597-z
Article
npj Digital Medicine |  (2025) 8:237 
12

aspired to demonstrate some kind of advantageous scaling property as
the number of qubits is increased. In Table 5, we list the sheer number
of algorithms that are classical computations with a nominal usage of
the word ‘quantum’. This list was added to throughout screening as
new terms were encountered. Many studies technically obfuscated the
distinction between QML algorithms and classical computations that
use quantum mechanical theory or other insights. For instance, in
medical imaging we exclude quantum mechanical corrections to
classical algorithms which help to reduce noise in reconstructing
images from raw sensor data. Finally, we exclude quantum algorithms
unlikely to arise in the context of analyzing classical digital health data,
for example: quantum sensing, quantum cryptography, and quantum
algorithms for genome pattern matching, genomic sequence align-
ment, or molecular and chemistry simulations.
Screening
Two independent researchers conducted title and abstract screening of all
searchresults:onereviewerhadahealthbackground,whiletheotherhad a
physics background. Full text review was performed by a total of three
reviewers. For consistency, one reviewer participated for all screening
stages including both abstract and full text screening. Conﬂicts were
resolved through internal discussion or by involving a third reviewer’s
opinion.
Data extraction and study quality appraisal
Study characteristics were extracted for all included studies. Additionally, a
study quality appraisal was performed to form consensus-based decisions
about including or excluding particular studies based on robustness62. These
appraisals are typically implemented during data extraction and prior to
narrative synthesis62. Our study quality assessment criteria analyses the rigor
with which QML algorithms were investigated16 and we do not include a
myriad of other potential benchmarks, e.g. for clinical robustness. At least
two reviewers independently scored eligible studies, and the maximum score
over both reviewers was selected during consensus formation. Attributes of
low vs. high quality studies with were compared with respect to our criteria.
Full data extraction template is enclosed in Supplementary Note 6 and
extracted data as well as underlying analysis code for data extraction is
available online63.
Data availability
Screening and data extraction were performed in Covidence60. All of the
resulting datasets from Covidence for the current study are freely available
online via: https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.ﬁgshare.2714838663.
Code availability
Covidence60 datasets were analyzed and presented using Python libraries.
All analysis and ﬁgure generation code for the current study are freely
available online via: https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.ﬁgshare.2714838663.
Received: 3 October 2024; Accepted: 29 March 2025;
References
1.
Hecht, J. The future of electronic health records. Nature 573
(2019).
2.
The Future of Electronic Health Records (2018). https://med.stanford.
edu/ehr/whitepaper.[Online; accessed 24. Sep. 2024].
3.
Mohsen, F., Ali, H., El Hajj, N. & Shah, Z. Artiﬁcial intelligence-based
methods for fusion of electronic health records and imaging data. Sci.
Rep. 12, 1–16 (2022).
4.
Obermeyer, Z. & Emanuel, E. J. Predicting the future—big data,
machine learning, and clinical medicine. N. Engl. J. Med. 375,
1216–1219 (2016).
5.
Rajkomar, A. etal. Scalableandaccuratedeeplearningwithelectronic
health records. npj Digital Med. 1, 1–10 (2018).
6.
Ullah, U. & Garcia-Zapirain, B. Quantum machine learning revolution
in healthcare: A systematic review of emerging perspectives and
applications. IEEE Access 12, 11423–11450 (2024).
7.
Maheshwari, D., Garcia-Zapirain, B. & Sierra-Sosa, D. Quantum
machine learning applications in the biomedical domain: A systematic
review. IEEE Access 10, 80463–80484 (2022).
8.
Flöther, F. F. The state of quantum computing applications in health
and medicine. Res. Directions: Quantum Technol. 1, e10 (2023).
9.
Cordier, B. A., Sawaya, N. P. D., Guerreschi, G. G. & McWeeney, S. K.
Biology and medicine in the landscape of quantum advantages. J. R.
Soc. Interface 19, 20220541 (2022).
10. Emani, P. S. et al. Quantum computing at the frontiers of biological
sciences. Nat. Methods 18, 701 (2021).
11. Outeiral, C. et al. The prospects of quantum computing in computational
molecular biology. WIREs Comput. Mol. Sci. 11, e1481 (2021).
12. Basu, S. et al. Towards quantum-enabled cell-centric therapeutics.
arXiv (2023). 2307.05734.
13. Biamonte, J. et al. Quantum machine learning. Nature 549, 195–202
(2017).
14. Marchetti, L. et al. Quantum computing algorithms: getting closer to
critical problems in computational biology. Brief. Bioinf. 23, bbac437
(2022).
15. Baiardi, A., Christandl, M. & Reiher, M. Quantum computing for
molecular biology. ChemBioChem 24, e202300120 (2023).
16. Bowles, J., Ahmed, S. & Schuld, M. Better than classical? The subtle
art of benchmarking quantum machine learning models. arXiv
2403.07059. (2024).
17. Bermejo, P. et al. Quantum convolutional neural networks are
(effectively) classically simulable. arXiv 2408.12739 (2024).
18. Schuld, M. & Killoran, N. Is quantum advantage the right goal for
quantum machine learning? PRX Quantum 3, 030101 (2022).
19. Krunic, Z., Flother, F., Seegan, G., Earnest-Noble, N. & Omar, S.
Quantumkernels for real-world predictions based on electronic health
records. IEEE Trans. Quantum Eng. 3, 1–11 (2022).
20. Schreiber, F. J., Eisert, J. & Meyer, J. J. Classical surrogates for
quantum learning models. Phys. Rev. Lett. 131, 100803 (2023).
21. Sweke,R. et al. Potentialand limitations of random Fourier features for
dequantizing quantum machine learning. arXiv 2309.11647 (2023).
22. Our guidance - Centre for Reviews and Dissemination, University of
York https://www.york.ac.uk/crd/guidance. [Online; accessed 24.
Sep. 2024] (2024).
23. Booth, A. Clear and present questions: formulating questions for
evidence based practice. Libr. Hi Tech. 24, 355–368 (2006).
24. PRISMA statement https://www.prisma-statement.org. [Online;
accessed 8. Aug. 2024] (2024).
25. Wang, Y. & Liu, J. A comprehensive review of Quantum Machine
Learning: from NISQ to Fault Tolerance. arXiv 2401.11351 (2024).
26. Peral-García, D., Cruz-Benito, J. & García-Peñalvo, F. J. Systematic
literature review: Quantum machine learning and its applications.
Comput. Sci. Rev. 51, 100619 (2024).
27. Jerbi, S. et al. Quantum machine learning beyond kernel methods.
Nat. Commun. 14, 1–8 (2023).
28. Date, P., Arthur, D. & Pusey-Nazzaro, L. QUBO formulations for
training machine learning models. Sci. Rep. 11, 1–10 (2021).
29. Guddanti, S. S., Padhye, A., Prabhakar, A. & Tayur, S. Pneumonia
detection by binary classiﬁcation: Classical, quantum, and hybrid
approaches for support vector machine (svm). Front. Comput. Sci. 5
(2023).
30. Piat, S. et al. Image classiﬁcation with quantum pre-training and auto-
encoders. Int. J. Quantum Inf. 16, 1840009 (2018).
31. Mc Keever, C. & Lubasch, M. Towards adiabatic quantum computing
using compressed quantum circuits. PRX Quantum 5, 020362 (2024).
32. Schuld, M., Sweke, R. & Meyer, J. J. Effect of data encoding on the
expressive power of variational quantum-machine-learning models.
Phys. Rev. A 103, 032430 (2021).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-025-01597-z
Article
npj Digital Medicine |  (2025) 8:237 
13

33. Sweke, R., Seifert, J.-P., Hangleiter, D. & Eisert, J. On the quantum
versus classical learnability of discrete distributions. Quantum 5, 417
(2021).
34. Giovannetti, V., Lloyd, S. & Maccone, L. Quantum random access
memory. Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 160501 (2008).
35. Phalak, K., Chatterjee, A. & Ghosh, S. Quantum random access
memory for dummies. arXiv 23, 7462 (2023).
36. Benedetti, M., Coyle, B., Fiorentini, M., Lubasch, M. & Rosenkranz, M.
Variational Inference with a Quantum Computer. Phys. Rev. Appl. 16,
044057 (2021).
37. Qu, Z., Shi, W. & Tiwari, P. Quantumconditional generative adversarial
network based on patch method for abnormal electrocardiogram
generation. Comput. Biol. Med. 166, 107549 (2023).
38. Das, S., Zhang, J., Martina, S., Suter, D. & Caruso, F. Quantum pattern
recognition on real quantum processing units. Quantum Mach. Intell.
5, 16 (2023).
39. Kawaguchi, H. Application of quantum computing to a linear non-
gaussian acyclic model for novel medical knowledge discovery. PLoS
ONE 18, e0283933 (2023).
40. Yano, H., Suzuki, Y., Raymond, R. & Yamamoto, N. Efﬁcient discrete
feature encoding for variational quantum classiﬁer. 11–21 (Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc.).
41. Landman, J. et al. Quantum methods for neural networks and
application to medical image classiﬁcation. Quantum 6, 881 (2022).
42. Kazdaghli, S., Kerenidis, I., Kieckbusch, J. & Teare, P. Improved
clinical data imputation via classical and quantum determinantal point
processes. Elife 12, RP89947 (2024).
43. Moradi, S. et al. Clinical data classiﬁcation with noisy intermediate
scale quantum computers. Sci. Rep. 12, 1851 (2022).
44. Moradi, S. et al. Error mitigation enables pet radiomic cancer
characterization on quantum computers. Eur. J. Nucl. Med. Mol.
Imaging 50, 3826–3837 (2023).
45. Choi, J. et al. Investigation of factors regarding the effects of covid-19
pandemic on college students’ depression by quantum annealer. Sci.
Rep. 14, 4684 (2024).
46. Nguyen, N. T. T. & Kenyon, G. T. Radiographic inference based on a
model of v1 simple cells implemented on the d-wave 2x quantum
annealing computer. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on
Rebooting Computing (ICRC),. https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
document/8638621/.
47. Monnet, M. et al. Pooling techniques in hybrid quantum-classical
convolutional neural networks. arXiv 2305.05603 (2023).
48. Cherrat, E. A. et al. Quantum vision transformers. Quantum 8, 1265
(2024).
49. Kerenidis, I. & Prakash, A. Quantum machine learning with subspace
states. arXiv 2202.00054 (2022).
50. Grzesiak, N. et al. Efﬁcient arbitrary simultaneously entangling
gates on a trapped-ion quantum computer. Nat. Commun. 11, 1–6
(2020).
51. Aswiga, R. V., Sridevi, S. & Indira, B. Leveraging quantum kernel
support vector machine for breast cancer diagnosis from
digital breast tomosynthesis images. Quantum Mach. Intell. 6, 40
(2024).
52. Niraula, D., Jamaluddin, J., Matuszak, M. M., Haken, R. K. T. & Naqa, I.
E. Quantum deep reinforcement learning for clinical decision support
in oncology: application to adaptive radiotherapy. Sci. Rep. 11, 23545
(2021).
53. Monbroussou, L., Landman, J., Wang, L., Grilo, A. B. & Kasheﬁ, E.
Subspace preserving quantum convolutional neural network
architectures. arXiv (2024). 2409.18918.
54. Larocca, M. et al. A review of barren plateaus in variational quantum
computing. arXiv 2405.00781 (2022).
55. Thanasilp, S., Wang, S., Cerezo, M. & Holmes, Z. Exponential
concentration in quantum kernel methods. Nat. Commun. 15, 1–13
(2024).
56. Anschuetz, E. R. & Kiani, B. T. Quantum variational algorithms are
swamped with traps. Nat. Commun. 13, 1–10 (2022).
57. Haralick, R. M., Shanmugam, K. & Dinstein, I. Textural features for
image classiﬁcation. IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern. SMC-3,
610–621 (2007).
58. Lubinski, T. et al. Application-oriented performance benchmarks for
quantum computing. arXiv 4, 1–32 (2021).
59. PROSPERO https://www.crd.york.ac.uk/prospero. [Online;
accessed 8. Aug. 2024] (2024).
60. Covidence systematic review software https://www.covidence.org.
[Online; accessed 8. Aug. 2024] (2024).
61. IBM. Five years ago today, we put the ﬁrst quantum computer on the
cloud. here’s how we did it. https://www.ibm.com/quantum/blog/
quantum-ﬁve-years (2021).
62. Popay,J., Roberts, H., Sowden, A., Petticrew, M. & Duffy, S. Guidance
on the conduct of narrative synthesis in systematic reviews: A product
from the ESRC Methods Programme. ResearchGate 1, b92 (2006).
63. Gupta, R. Quantum machine learning for digital health: a systematic
review (dataset) https://ﬁgshare.com/articles/dataset/_/27148386/0
(2024).
64. Weigold, M., Barzen, J., Leymann, F. & Salm, M. Encoding patterns
for quantum algorithms. IET Quantum Commun. 2, 141–152
(2021).
65. Schuld, M. & Petruccione, F. Supervised Learning with Quantum
Computers (Springer International Publishing, Cham, Switzerland,
2018). https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007/978-3-319-96424-9.
66. Chen, Z.-Y. et al. Efﬁcient and error-resilient data access protocols for
a limited-sized quantum random access memory. arXiv 2303.05207
(2023).
67. Johri, S. et al. Nearest centroid classiﬁcation on a trapped ion
quantum computer. npj Quantum Inf. 7, 1–11 (2021).
68. Leymann, F. & Barzen, J. The bitter truth about gate-based
quantum algorithms in the NISQ era. Quantum Sci. Technol. 5,
044007 (2020).
69. Ventura, D. & Martinez, T. Initializing the amplitude distribution of a
quantum state. Found. Phys. Lett. 12, 547–559 (1999).
Acknowledgements
R.S.G would like to thank K. Beer, R. Grewal, M. Riba, and R. Sweke for
useful feedback.
Author contributions
R.S.G, T.E, S.S and J.D.P were involved in study design, formulating
research question, deﬁning scope considerations, and inclusion/exclusion
criteria. R.S.G, T.E, S.S developed search strategy, data extraction and
quality appraisal templates. R.S.G, C.E.W, T.E and S.S participated in
screening,data extraction, and resolution of conﬂicts. R.S.G performed data
analysis. All authors contributed to writing the manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains
supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-025-01597-z.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
Riddhi S. Gupta.
Reprints and permissions information is available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-025-01597-z
Article
npj Digital Medicine |  (2025) 8:237 
14

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted
by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to
obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this
licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2025
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-025-01597-z
Article
npj Digital Medicine |  (2025) 8:237 
15
