Source-PDF: D:\Review\New folder\Main\Core quantumbiomed + health relevance\Advancing single-cell omics and cell-based therapeutics with quantum computing.pdf
Relative-Path: New folder\Main\Core quantumbiomed + health relevance\Advancing single-cell omics and cell-based therapeutics with quantum computing.pdf
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology
nature reviews molecular cell biology
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41580-025-00918-0
Roadmap
 Check for updates
Advancing single-cell omics 
and cell-based therapeutics 
with quantum computing
Aritra Bose 
  1, Kahn Rhrissorrakrai 
  1, Filippo Utro 
  1, Laxmi Parida 
  1 
 & the Quantum for Healthcare Life  
Sciences Consortium*
Abstract
The generation of highly accurate models of behaviours of 
individual cells and cell populations through integration of 
high-resolution assays with advanced computational tools would 
transform precision medicine. Recent breakthroughs in single-cell and 
spatial transcriptomics and multi-omics technologies, coupled with 
artificial intelligence, are driving rapid progress in model development. 
Complementing the advances in artificial intelligence, quantum 
computing is maturing as a novel compute paradigm that may offer 
potential solutions to overcome the computational bottlenecks 
inherent to capturing cellular dynamics. In this Roadmap article, we 
discuss the advancements and challenges in spatiotemporal single-cell 
analysis, explore the possibility of quantum computing to address the 
challenges and present a case study on how quantum computing may 
be integrated into cell-based therapeutics. The specific confluence 
of quantum and classical computing with high-resolution assays may 
offer a crucial path towards the generation of transformative models 
of cellular behaviours and perturbation responses.
Sections
Introduction
Quantum computing in spatial 
transcriptomics
Temporal quantum 
computational modelling in 
single-cell transcriptomics
Integrating single-cell 
multi-omics and discovering 
meaningful interactions
Learning from limited samples
A quantum-enabled 
multimodal cellular model  
use case
Conclusion and future 
perspective
1IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA. *A list of authors and their affiliations appears at the end of the paper. 
 e-mail: parida@us.ibm.com

Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology
Roadmap
and probability-based Bayesian methods, kernel methods, optimal 
transport, tensor decomposition, ensemble learning, non-negative 
matrix factorization, clustering using kernel methods and topologi-
cal data analysis (TDA) and so on17. Although applications of these 
methods to single-cell analyses have been impressive, important 
limitations remain that hinder their application in the clinic29. Some 
of these limitations are related to native properties of single-cell data, 
e.g. innate complexity and scale28, whereas others are associated 
with shortcomings of AI algorithms, for example, inability to learn 
in sample-limited contexts, model overfitting, learning saturation30, 
difficulty in capturing global contextual signals, poor generaliza-
tion to out-of-distribution (OOD) data and quadratic time and space 
complexity, among others. These challenges can be exacerbated in 
combined multimodal settings, where AI models often fail to cap-
ture fine-grained spatial resolution31, to generalize across batches 
or experimental conditions32 or to resolve subtle temporal or spatial 
trajectories33.
Though AI has proven crucial for analysing (spatial) single-cell 
data, the above noted limitations may prevent the full realization of 
these spatial single-cell technologies. For certain classes of compu-
tational problems, the solution may lie with quantum computing, 
which is an emerging paradigm of high-performance computation 
that departs from the conventional binary logic underpinning classical 
computing (Fig. 1b). Instead, quantum computing leverages principles 
of quantum mechanics34,35, such as superposition and entanglement, 
to perform calculations. These principles are particularly attractive 
for those problems whose complexity or memory requirements grow 
exponentially.
Several different quantum computing architectures are being 
developed on distinct types of quibits, including neutral atom qubits36, 
spin qubits37, topological qubits38, trapped-ion qubits39 and supercon-
ducting qubits40–42. The scale of these quantum devices ranges from 
tens to 1,000 qubits, and although they mainly remain susceptible 
to noise43, the development of error correction techniques used to 
protect quantum information is advancing44,45. These noisy devices 
are termed prefault tolerant quantum devices (PFTQD), as opposed 
to fault-tolerant quantum devices, in which error is corrected to 
yield logical qubits45. Progress has been made beyond qubit counts 
in quantum hardware43, such as dynamic circuits with mid-circuit 
measurements46, improved fidelities of 1-qubit and 2-qubit gates47 and 
increased execution speed of quantum circuits47. Moreover, advances in 
error mitigation and error suppression techniques, when coupled with 
circuit cutting and knitting techniques48,49, have enabled researchers 
to scale up the size of their quantum experiments.
These quantum computation advancements (Fig. 1b) demonstrate 
progress towards a stage where quantum computers can solve certain 
meaningful problems faster, cheaper or more accurately than classical 
computers alone for selected applications40,50,51. Similarly, quantum 
algorithms such as quantum optimization and quantum ML (QML) aim 
to analyse datasets more efficiently or with better generalization than 
classical algorithms52–54. Depending on the specific use case, quantum 
algorithms may enable certain benefits in metrics such as accuracy, 
energy efficiency, input data requirements and speed55.
Driven by the rapid advancement in both quantum comput-
ing and single-cell technologies, in this Roadmap, we consider the 
potential of quantum computing to accelerate discovery in single-cell 
and spatiotemporal single-cell analyses, particularly given certain 
constraints faced by classical computing56–60. In the following five 
sections, we discuss the advantages of and challenges faced by 
Introduction
Human physiology and diseases are fundamentally a function of the 
states, behaviours and interactions of billions of individual cells. 
Therefore, understanding the behaviours of individual cells or cell 
collectives in a multitude of contexts, such as stimulation through 
signalling molecules or exposure to therapeutic agents, has wide rang-
ing implications to human wellness, diseases and ageing and is driving 
technological innovation (Fig. 1). Consequently, technologies such as 
single-cell sequencing, spatial transcriptomics and spatial proteomics 
methods have been named ‘Method of the Year’ by Nature Methods 
in 20131, 20212 and 20243, respectively. Moreover, recent consortia 
efforts to develop biological atlases, such as The Cancer Genome 
Atlas4, Human Tumour Atlas Network5, Human BioMolecular Atlas6, 
Human Cell Atlas7,8 and Virtual Cell Atlas9, have generated the neces-
sary resources to capture the molecular behaviours of cells and tissues 
by creating vast repositories of genomic, transcriptomic, proteomic, 
epigenomic, imaging and so on data. Although each of these modali-
ties is individually informative, the true potential lies in the ability 
to develop large multimodal models capable of discovering biologi-
cal properties by integrating the orthogonal information contained 
across assays (Fig. 1a). These multimodal methodologies are already 
being deployed for applications such as generating single-cell maps 
of metastatic breast cancer10, characterizing tumour evolution within 
the three-dimensional microenvironmental context11 and building a 
spatiotemporal atlas of the human maternal–foetal interface12.
The integration of these high-resolution technologies can cap-
ture a holistic perspective of the cellular and metabolic activities of 
a malfunctioning tissue with single-cell precision, enabling the study 
of spatiotemporal dynamics of gene expression, molecular interac-
tions, signalling pathways and environmental factors13 with unprec-
edented resolution. Studies demonstrating the clinical usefulness of 
this perspective include those of cancer14, cardiovascular disease15, 
and diabetes16. With the advent of spatial transcriptomics methods, 
it is possible to detect, model and understand cellular microenviron-
ments at exact spatial coordinates. This advancement enables explor-
ing cell–cell interactions (CCIs) while incorporating intracellular and 
extracellular information to gain insight into the molecular underpin-
nings of complex diseases17, whose heterogeneous pathologies cannot 
be described through single-protein effects.
The breakthroughs made with these assays and consortia efforts 
were only possible with a corresponding transformative application of 
artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) to biological prob-
lems, which enabled new advancements in multimodal models, syn-
thetic biology and protein structure prediction (Fig. 1b). For instance, 
predicting the three-dimensional protein structure from sequence18 
has been substantially improved through transformer networks19, 
with profound effects on synthetic biology and attempts to generate 
large protein complexes20,21, proteins and, specifically, enzymes22,23. 
AI/ML models have been used to predict the effects of non-coding 
genomic variants24, reach human-level performance with automated 
whole-cell segmentation25 and match the accuracy of clinicians in 
imaging diagnostics26,27.
Computational methods used in spatial transcriptomics perform 
multiple tasks, including integration of single-cell RNA sequencing 
(scRNA-seq) data, cell-type annotation, cell segmentation, spatial 
clustering, dimensionality reduction, inference of cell trajectories and 
interactions and data visualization28. These tasks are often performed 
using methods that can be broadly grouped together on the basis of 
their underlying similarities, including graph-based deep learning 

Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology
Roadmap
state-of-the-art algorithms in multiple domains and review quantum 
computing analogues for those techniques, in addition to discussing 
how they may be able to solve some of the identified challenges (Fig. 2 
and Table 1). We address topics of quantum computing in spatial 
transcriptomics, temporal quantum computational modelling in 
single-cell transcriptomics, integration of single-cell multi-omics 
and learning from limited numbers of samples. We finally provide a 
framework for integrating quantum algorithms with state-of-the-art 
ML algorithms for a quantum-enabled multimodal cellular model 
use case (Fig. 3).
Quantum computing in spatial transcriptomics
We will use spatial transcriptomics as a specific data modality to highlight 
computational tasks that would be applicable to similar modalities such 
as spatial proteomics. Spatial transcriptomics refers to methodologies 
for quantifying mRNA expression of large numbers of genes in addition 
to preserving the positional context of cells in a tissue. This is achieved 
through either imaging-based methods, such as single-molecule fluo-
rescence in situ hybridization (smFISH), which visualizes gene expres-
sion in the cellular space, or through sequencing-based methods that 
capture transcriptomes from defined tissue regions61.
Cell trajectory
Spatiotemporal single-cell representation
Multimodal omics analysis
Image/spatial
segmentation
Cell annotation
Sample acquistition
Spatial assay
Single-cell assay
Single-cell
barcoding and
sequencing
Sanger sequencing
PCR
First PC
Feynman proposes quantum computing 
RNA-seq
Human genome 
sequenced
First NGS (454)
scRNA-seq (single-cell 
transcriptomics)
Spatial transcriptomics
Spatial multi-omics
10x Genomics,
Smart-seq, Drop-seq
Single-cell multi-omics, 
RNA FISH, Slide-seq
Spatial proteomics,
ATAC-seq, CITE-seq
Real-time in vivo 
spatial profiling, 
increased resolutiion
1970s
1980s
1990s
2001
2003
2005
2006
2007
2009
2011
2015
2016
2017
2018
2020
2021
2023
2029
2030s
Assay milestones
b
a
Classical computing
Quantum computing
Deep learning
AlphaGO 
Transformers
IBM System One
GPT1
GPT3
AlphaFold
Statistical machine learning
(SVM, HMM) and CNNs
Shor’s and Grover’s algorithms
Shor’s algorithm on NMR 
quantum computer
Quantum error correction code 
Transmon superconducting qubit 
and  D-Wave One
Utiilty scale quantum computation 
Error corrected quantum computer 
with 200 qubits
2,000 logical qubits and 
quantum-centric supercomputers
IBM quantum computing 
in the cloud
Fig. 1 | Overview of spatial and single-cell assays and relevant quantum 
computing techniques. a, Single-cell and spatial data are studied through a 
variety of techniques, including profiling of biomolecules in single-cell assays; 
spatial assays that capture regions where biomolecules are present (for example, 
single-molecule fluorescence in situ hybridization); image and spatial artificial 
intelligence segmentation to detect cells, cellular structures and tissues from 
imaging and spatial data; cell annotation; multimodal omics data integration; 
and cell trajectory analysis, with the goal of creating a spatiotemporal 
representation with single-cell resolution. b, A timeline of relevant milestones 
in the development of biological-assay development, classical computational 
achievements and quantum computational achievements. ATAC-seq, assay for 
transposase-accessible chromatin using sequencing; CITE-seq, cellular indexing 
of transcriptomes and epitopes by sequencing; CNN, convolutional neural 
network; GPT1, generative pretrained transformer 1; HMM, hidden Markov 
model; NGS, next-generation sequencing; NMR, nuclear magnetic resonance; 
PC, personal computer; RNA FISH, RNA fluorescence in situ hybridization; 
scRNA-seq, single-cell RNA sequencing; SVM, support vector machines.

Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology
Roadmap
Methods for spatial data processing
Analysing spatial transcriptomics data entails both upstream and 
downstream data analysis. Upstream, raw data from smFISH-based 
techniques are processed to identify transcript spots, match spots 
to genes and assign spots to cells61. Achieving cellular resolution with 
high-density measurements requires accurate cell segmentation and 
manual fine-tuning with corrections62. Various classical computa-
tion methods have been proposed for cell segmentation, including 
conventional deep learning methods and techniques that integrate 
scRNA-seq data. For example, CelloType63 utilizes a transformer-based 
deep learning technique for multiscale cell segmentation and annota-
tion of spatial omics data. Methods such as Baysor64 spatially cluster 
observed molecules to cells from smFISH data by modelling each cell 
using Markov random fields. The method spatial transcriptomics cell 
segmentation65 with its transformer-based model infers each spot as 
either a part of a cell or the surrounding extracellular matrix through an 
attention mechanism and works around the rigorous hyperparameter 
tuning of conventional image segmentation methods by incorporating 
scRNA-seq data. These methods are usually constrained by the qual-
ity and volume of training images and scRNA-seq data, the accurate 
integration of high-dimensional transcriptomics and imaging data, 
and poor generalization in OOD datasets and cell types66. Typically, 
smFISH techniques produce low spatial resolution data. To address the 
absence of transcriptome-wide expression values for unprofiled genes, 
these datasets often employ reconstruction methods that frequently 
leverage scRNA-seq data along with a select group ‘landmark’ genes67. 
Most of these methods either use similarity measures between each cell 
in scRNA-seq and each location, favouring genes that are specific to a 
subset of cells in a spatial reference67 or formulating the reconstruc-
tion as an optimal transport problem for probabilistic embedding of 
similar cells68.
Many quantum algorithms relevant to upstream smFISH preproc-
essing tasks, such as for cell segmentation (Fig. 2 and Table 1) are being 
actively studied for their potential utility on quantum devices. For 
example, quantum convolutional neural networks (QCNN)69,70 may be a 
promising alternative to transformer-based methods such as CelloType 
owing to potential greater generalizability for accurately segmenting 
unknown cell types. Alternatively, such transformer-based methods 
may be substituted with quantum doubly stochastic matrix (DSM)-
based transformers that replace the conventional softmax function 
in the attention module, which yields a right-stochastic matrix, with a 
variational quantum circuit to compute a DSM that has shown certain 
advantages71. Similarly, quantum algorithms have been proposed 
with theoretical polynomial speedup over their classical counterpart 
in learning Markov random fields72. Recently, quantum transformer 
models have been proposed for performing natural language pro-
cessing tasks requiring fewer parameters compared to the classical 
benchmarks73,74, which can potentially be leveraged in cell segmen-
tation tasks being performed by methods such as spatial transcrip-
tomics cell segmentation. For spatial reconstruction of smFISH data, 
identifying the similarity between cells and spatial locations can be 
challenging as functional regions of tissues may not be composed 
entirely of cells with identical expression patterns67. Representing cell 
similarity as a graph of cells and employing discrete-time quantum 
Temporal and
perturbation
modelling
Learning from
limited samples
Higher-order
interactions
Multi-omics
integration
Data
processing
Data
analytics
• (Q)CNN
• (Q)Markov field
• (Q)MCMC
• (Q)GNN
Quantum computing:
• Variational algorithms
• Algorithms targeting FTQDs
• (Q)Cumulants
• (Q)TDA
(Q)Ensemble
(Q)Transformer
(Q)Reservoir computing
• (Q)k-means
• (Q)ODE
• (Q)Tensor decomposition
• (Q)Random walk
• (Q)GAN
• VQC
• (Q)NN
• (Q)Optimal transport
• (Q)VAE
Spatiotemporal 
single-cell analysis
Fig. 2 | Map of computational tasks performed by classical and quantum 
computation algorithms for spatiotemporal single-cell analysis. These 
six broad computational tasks (coloured lines) are shown intersecting with 
various relevant applicable algorithms denoted by circles, all leading towards 
the goal of spatiotemporal single-cell analysis. Certain classical methods have a 
quantum analogue — denoted with a preceding (Q). These algorithms and their 
considerations are described in further detail in Table 1. FTQDs, fault-tolerant 
quantum devices; QCNN, quantum convolutional neural network; QCumulant, 
quantum cumulant calculation; QGAN, quantum generative adversarial network; 
QGNN, quantum graph neural networks; QMCMC, quantum Monte Carlo Markov 
chain; QNN, quantum neural network; QODE, quantum ordinary differential 
equations; QTDA, quantum topological data analysis; QVAE, quantum variational 
autoencoders; VQC, variational quantum circuit.

Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology
Roadmap
random walks75 to find trajectories of similar cells can be an alternative 
for capturing fine-grained mappings of cell locations with scRNA-seq 
data. For optimal transport mapping of the cell spatial reconstruction 
problem, the quantum conditional optimal transport method can be 
used to effectively map the problem into a quantum circuit and solve 
the assignment problem76.
Methods for spatial data analytics
A host of downstream classical computing methods have been devel-
oped to analyse spatial data collected by upstream techniques. Many 
popular scRNA-seq packages provide such a capability, including 
Seurat77, Squidpy78, Giotto79 and so on. In downstream processing 
of spatial transcriptomics data, some of the major areas of analysis 
Table 1 | Classical computing algorithms, their challenges and their quantum computing analogues in performing various 
tasks in single-cell analyses
Classical 
computing method
Challenges
Quantum computing 
equivalent
Biological applications
Convolutional 
neural network
Requires large data and computational resources to train; 
weak generalization and unstable transfer learning
(Quantum) convolutional 
neural network69,70
Cell classification209 and segmentation62; CpG 
prediction210; T cell receptors classification211
Markov random 
field
Learning latent structures in graphs; curse of dimensionality
(Quantum) Markov random 
fielda (ref. 72)
Cell segmentation, clustering and cell-type 
annotation64
Transformers
Requires large data and computational resources to train; 
poor OOD generalization; lack of accuracy in noisy data
QTransformer71,73,74
Cell segmentation63; single-cell DNA 
sequencing denoising and imputation212;  
CpG prediction213; perturbation modelling134–137
Random walk
Sensitive to restart probability; difficult to select parameters; 
computationally expensive; limitations in detecting 
communities
Discrete-time and 
continuous-time random 
walks75,163,164
Cell clustering and imputation214; 
cell trajectory inference152; CCIs215
Optimal transport
Sensitive to outliers; computationally expensive in large 
datasets; sensitive to optimization parameters; requires large 
samples to accurately estimate transport map
Quantum optimal 
transport216; quantum 
conditional optimal 
transport76
Spatial reconstruction68; cell differentiation133; 
lineage tracing217; trajectory inference218; 
cell–cell communication219; perturbation 
modelling132,133; multi-omics integration220
Graph neural 
network
Addressing class imbalance; sensitive to noise in graphs; 
OOD generalization; transfer learning issues
Quantum graph neural 
networks221
Cell-type clustering89; deconvolution90; 
CCIs91; spatial transcriptomics88
Markov chain 
Monte Carlo
Requires extensive hyperparameter tuning; sensitive to 
convergence criteria; high autocorrelation; takes long time 
to converge
Quantum Markov chain 
Monte Carloa (ref. 95)
Spatial transcriptomics67; perturbation 
modelling116
Ensemble learning
Computationally expensive; weighting each member in 
ensemble; determining optimal number of base learners; 
hyperparameter tuning221
Quantum ensemble 
learning96,98
CCIs90; classifying single-cell data; 
differential gene expression in single-cell RNA 
sequencing222; prediction tasks223
Topological data 
analysis
Does not scale for larger datasets and higher order; 
interpretability; parameter selection
Quantum topological data 
analysisa (refs. 99–101)
Spatial transcriptomics87; multimodal 
integration172
k-means
Parameter selection; sensitive to outliers; scaling to large 
datasets; cluster size sensitivity
Quantum k-means224
Cell trajectory inference109; cell clustering224
Gene regulatory 
network
Unable to infer simultaneous, inter-regulatory connections 
between all genes in concert
Quantum gene regulatory 
network225
Perturbation modelling33; predicting 
transcription factors226
Variational 
autoencoder
Learns uninformative latent representations; sensitive 
to noisy data; selecting hyperparameters; lack of OOD 
generalization
Quantum variational 
autoencoder148,149
Trajectory inference122; perturbation 
modelling136; multi-omics integration157
Continuous-state 
hidden Markov 
model
Estimation of posterior state probabilities; scales 
exponentially with large datasets; assumes conditional 
independence in input states227; sensitive to convergence 
criteria
Quantum circuits for 
graphical model or 
quantum probabilistic 
graphical modelsa (ref. 139)
Trajectory inference116
ODE
Stiffness; parameter estimation; scaling issues with larger 
datasets
Quantum algorithms for 
solving ODEa (ref. 227)
Cell differentiation112,113,115; trajectory 
inference228
Neural ODE
Computationally expensive; stiffness; lack of OOD 
generalization229
Quantum neural ODE151
Cell differentiation115; trajectory inference230; 
temporal modelling150,229
Reservoir 
computing
Difficult to estimate nonlinear functions; computationally 
expensive
Quantum reservoir 
computing140,142,143
Temporal cell segmentation118
Generative 
adversarial network
Poor OOD generalization; non-convergence and instability; 
vanishing gradients231
Quantum generative 
adversarial 
networks144–146,178,180
Perturbation modelling135,137; trajectory 
inference232; single-cell RNA sequencing 
imputation233
Tensor 
decomposition
Intractable for large datasets and higher orders; determining 
optimal rank; nonlinear feature extraction
Quantum tensor 
decomposition173–175
Multi-omics integration156; spatial 
transcriptomics231
aImplementation of fault-tolerant quantum devices required. CCIs, cell–cell interactions; ODE, ordinary differential equation; OOD, out of distribution.

Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology
Roadmap
involve capturing alterations in gene expression, detecting muta-
tions, examining associations between gene expression and cell-type 
localization, and identifying spatial regions. These tasks are often done 
by modelling and learning on spatial cell graphs in the form of graph 
neural networks (GNNs), explicitly learning on cells instead of encoding 
pixels and integrating single-cell information with disease tissue (for 
example, tumour) morphology and topology, as well as interactions 
among cells and tissues80. GNNs are constructed on these cell graphs 
with an interpretable input space. When paired with model explain-
ability techniques, they can provide valuable insights into which cells 
or cell neighbourhoods drive the biological process in tissues81. GNNs 
are ubiquitously used in spatial transcriptomics tasks such as cell-type 
clustering82 and deconvolution83 in the upstream and predicting spa-
tially resolved gene expression or modelling cell microenvironment 
with cell–tissue interactions and CCIs84 in the downstream. However, 
the complexity of tumour graphs and the entangled cell neighbour-
hoods can lead to suboptimal embedding spaces of GNNs, hampering 
the learning of clinically meaningful patterns. Moreover, searching 
for relatively small query subgraphs over large, complex graphs is 
nondeterministic polynomial-hard85. Other methods to find spatially 
resolved genes commonly use Gaussian process regression86, TDA87, 
spatial autocorrelation88 and more. Most of these methods lack sta-
tistical power, require extensive hyperparameter fine-tuning28 or are 
time consuming, particularly those employing Bayesian methods such 
as Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC). Similar to resolving spatial 
regions, characterizing CCIs are computationally expensive tasks often 
achieved by identifying ligand–receptor pairs89. As gene expression 
is affected by CCIs, several packages have been developed to account 
for the association of ligand–receptor pairs with gene expression by 
constructing a covariance matrix of neighbourhood graphs90 or using 
ensemble learning of expression of each gene of interest91. However, 
such approaches necessitate computationally heavy operations, such 
as inverting large matrices or computing pairwise distances for large 
numbers of cells.
These limitations present opportunities for quantum comput-
ing, for example, in classification of tumours or optimizing subgraph 
matching using GNNs (Table 1). Quantum–classical computing hybrid 
methods can leverage the state-space available to quantum methods 
as well as benefit from state-of-the-art classical GNN models for spatial 
transcriptomics tasks, to improve predictive performance for complex 
diseases through spatial reconstruction or modelling tumour microen-
vironment. Algorithms such as variational quantum classifiers (VQCs), 
quantum neural networks (QNNs) and others have shown to be more 
generalizable when learning from a relatively smaller training dataset52. 
Thus, these models can be used to learn from a low-dimensional embed-
ding in small sample size scenarios, as is often the case in spatial tran-
scriptomics given limited availability of whole slide images and fewer 
genes as reference92. A hybrid quantum–classical model, which used 
an end-to-end training paradigm from GNN embeddings of whole slide 
images and VQC, achieved comparable performance to baseline meth-
ods using GNNs for breast cancer subtyping93. As quantum computing 
hardware is still evolving, efficient strategies for subsampling, such as 
obtaining coresets94 or kernelized subsampling methods, are often 
used to fit the training data into quantum hardware for efficient pro-
cessing and discerning disease subtypes92. To address the issue of the 
scalability of Bayesian methods for identifying spatially resolved genes, 
quantum MCMC, which has been empirically shown to require fewer 
iterations to converge and is more robust to noise95, can be applied. 
Similarly, quantum ensemble methods can make comparable pre-
dictions with a magnitude fewer number of learners or samples96,97 
and in some cases achieves a quadratic improvement over classical 
ensemble learning methods such as AdaBoost98. These methods can 
Multi-omics integration and higher-order feature extraction
Spatiotemporal modelling of cellular microenvironment
Cell engineering for immunotherapy
Multimodal data:
• Clinical data
• Spatial single-cell
multi-omics
• Immunological assays
• Gene expression
• Tissue imaging
• Organoid drug screens
• Drug profiles
Quantum kernel methods
Quantum optimal transport
Quantum tensor decomposition, 
quantum cumulant computation and QTDA
High-order
biomarkers
High-order
networks
Samples
Genes
Omics
x1
x2
|Ф(x1)]
|Ф(x2)]
∆1
∆2
High-order tensors
Hybrid classical–quantum methods
Fig. 3 | Overview of a quantum-enabled cell-based therapeutics. 
Spatiotemporal single-cell, cell population, imaging, drug profile and clinical 
data are analysed with three different goals enabled by quantum computing 
technologies to capture varying aspects of cellular behaviours. These 
technologies include (from left to right): hybrid classical–quantum machine 
learning with quantum convolutional neural networks or quantum kernel 
methods, integrated with classical central processing units (CPU), to aid cell 
engineering for immunotherapy, hybrid classical–quantum machine learning 
and quantum optimal transport to model tumour microenvironments from 
single-cell spatial data with perturbation modelling to predict cellular response, 
and multi-omics integration and higher-order feature extraction to capture 
cryptic interactions and biomarkers of single-cell perturbation responses 
using quantum tensor decomposition, quantum cumulant computation, and 
quantum topological data analysis (QTDA). These higher-order biomarkers are 
represented by different numbers and combinations of features from various 
modalities. Using insights from each research area and by combining the efforts 
between them, a cell-centric therapeutics design strategy can be achieved for 
treatment options that optimize the cellular context to improve therapeutic 
response. x1 and x2 represent the original data vector for samples 1 and 2, 
respectively. Φ(x1) and Φ(x2) represented the quantum embedding of the x1 and x2 
data vectors, respectively. Δ1 and Δ2 represent different trajectories of the cellular 
state space.

Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology
Roadmap
improve the performance of the ensemble learning method to extract 
relationships between spatial omics data91. Quantum TDA (QTDA) has 
demonstrated a super-polynomial speedup in fault-tolerant quantum 
devices for some particular structured graphs with large spectral gaps 
in the Laplacian99 or in some cases provable exponential speedup100. 
Hence, QTDA can be used to identify spatially resolved genes by fast 
computations of the Betti numbers87,101.
Temporal quantum computational modelling  
in single-cell transcriptomics
Biological processes are often better understood through a temporal 
lens, but scRNA-seq datasets are typically collected at different time 
points, then integrated for analysis. In some cases, these time points are 
hourly, as in immune response and drug treatment studies, whereas in 
other cases they can span days, months or years, as in cell differentia-
tion and clinical trials102. Statistical, graph-based and ML techniques 
are then applied to examine cell frequencies within samples, deline-
ate gene regulatory networks (GRNs) in individual cells and capture 
relationships among cells. Although capturing dynamics of cells is 
naturally achieved using time series, it can also be performed by analys-
ing a snapshot from a single sample using methods such as trajectory 
inference or RNA velocity103.
Trajectory inference is often done by first embedding the 
scRNA-seq data to a lower dimension with principal component analy-
sis, diffusion maps, autoencoders and so on33. Then, a trajectory tree 
is inferred, learning on a lower-dimensional manifold, which captures 
the underlying biological variation. A root cell is then selected on the 
basis of a prior or data-driven heuristics, and pseudotime values are 
assigned to all other cells according to their positions along the inferred 
trajectory104,105. Cell expression similarity and entropy106, which are free 
of root cell determination, are also used in this step. Popular trajec-
tory inference methods infer trajectory graphs and cluster cell states 
by either graph partitioning methods107, minimum spanning trees108, 
or clustering using k-means followed by pruning small branches and 
leveraging spatial information109. Methods based on optimal transport 
theory110,111 that focus on a distribution of cell placements along the 
trajectory rather than on specific placement, have also been developed. 
The continuous dynamics of cell differentiation can be reconstructed 
from snapshot measurements by leveraging connections of optimal 
transport with ordinary differential equations (ODE)112,113, but they are 
limited by either ineffective dimensionality reduction techniques or 
model limitations114. In addition, a combination of variational autoen-
coders (VAE) with neural ODE have been proposed to overcome these 
limitations115. Continuous-state hidden Markov models (HMMs) are 
also used to assign cells to any position in its trajectory by initiating 
the assignment using clustering and thereafter assigning them with 
greater assignment probability in each step of the iteration, until a 
criterion is met116. Reservoir computing is another means for model-
ling information dynamics in cells117. Reservoir computing models are 
based on recurrent neural networks to project input data into higher 
dimensional spaces based on the dynamics of a ‘reservoir’, which is a 
fixed, nonlinear system. Such methods are well suited to temporal or 
sequencing processing, showing improved performance for temporal 
segmentation of T cells from high-resolution live cell imaging118.
Perturbation modelling
Modelling dynamic behaviours of cells is not limited to lineage trac-
ing and interactions: there is also a need to study how external influ-
ences, such as genetic knockouts, drug interventions, temperature 
and so on, perturb cells, to better understand pharmacological and 
translational aspects of cellular processes114. Modelling perturbation 
responses at single-cell resolution is imperative for designing novel 
therapeutics119,120. Perturbation modelling can be categorized into five 
main objectives: predictive models of changes in cellular behaviour; 
discovering phenotypic characteristics of cells under perturbation; 
predictive models of perturbation by drug compounds, which facilitate 
drug repurposing; identifying synergistic or antagonistic interactions; 
and predicting chemical structural components from perturbation 
data114. These objectives can then be addressed by a variety of classi-
cal and quantum algorithms (Fig. 2 and Table 1). Technologies built on 
CRISPR-mediated pooled knockout screens such as Perturb-seq121 and 
its variants such as CRISP–seq121 provide the data to understand a gene’s 
function with respect to its expression when knocking out or knocking 
down a gene. These perturbation-based technologies have been devel-
oped to capture perturbation responses on single-nucleotide polymor-
phisms with Mix-seq122, perturbations in multi-omics modalities with 
Perturb-CITE-seq123 and perturbations in epigenetic and transcriptome 
mosaics with Mosaic-seq124.
Classical computational tools that analyse single-cell CRISPR 
screening data range from statistical inference models to complex gen-
erative and AI foundation models125. The statistical graph-based models 
are often probabilistic and regression-based and provide dimension-
ality reduction126, clustering127 and robust statistical analysis after 
removing confounding effects. GRNs are leveraged to make predictions 
such as identifying transcription factors controlling genes by inte-
grating scRNA-seq and scATAC-seq (assay for transposase-accessible 
chromatin using sequencing) data128. Generative models are used 
ubiquitously in predicting perturbation responses given the availability 
of large-scale atlases of cells. Methods such as generative adversarial 
networks (GAN) have been proposed for simulating single-cell differ-
entiation through latent spaces129. However, due to constraints of GANs 
when training on high-dimensional structured data, and effective map-
ping of gene expressions to latent spaces, VAEs130 have been used more 
frequently in generating cells with desired properties. For instance, 
scGen combines VAEs and latent representations of a low-dimensional 
manifold to capture underlying cellular mechanisms while predicting 
perturbation responses within and between cell types119.
A recent trend is using the mathematical framework of optimal 
transport or cutting-edge transformer models to capture perturba-
tion effects in scRNA-seq data131. Optimal transport methods such 
as CellOT132 and CondOT133 provide a model for molecular profiling 
of cells by generating an optimal transport map for each perturba-
tion to accurately predict cell-to-cell variability in drug responses, 
drug’s mode-of-action, OOD extrapolations across species and 
extracting subpopulation-specific drug effects. Foundation models 
with pretrained transformers have also been developed for under-
standing the dynamics of cellular responses to in silico perturbation 
to predict phenotypes134, cell-type-specific transcription factors135, 
drug response136, cell similarity137 and potential therapeutic targets. 
Although the advent of the transformer architecture and large language 
models provide exciting opportunities, they have many limitations 
ranging from the quality of data they are trained on, effectiveness of the 
prediction, ability to capture underlying dynamics in GRNs, robustness 
of multitask learning and model interpretability119,120.
There are several opportunities for quantum computing to 
enhance perturbation modelling. HMMs can be represented as proba-
bilistic graphical models — a chain of dependent states with inference 
based on given outcomes. This makes HMMs suitable for time-series 

Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology
Roadmap
analysis, and continuous-state HMMs have been proposed to derive cell 
state trajectory116. However, their applications face difficulties when 
there are structures with high-order interactions, which is often the 
case for genes affecting cellular trajectories across space138, leading 
to computational intractability. Recently, quantum circuits for graphi-
cal models have been proposed to obtain an unbiased estimate of the 
underlying probability distribution of a graphical model139. Quantum 
circuits for graphical models scale in the worst-case exponentially in 
the number of model parameters, which can be a substantial improve-
ment over classical probabilistic graphical models, such as MCMC or 
HMM. Quantum reservoir computing and its many variants have also 
been proposed to estimate nonlinear functions of an input quantum 
state to understand the dynamic process influencing it140. The training 
is conceptually simple and computationally inexpensive141, making 
quantum reservoir computing attractive for applications in model-
ling cellular dynamics. These reservoir computing systems can be made 
more computationally efficient through physical implementations142, 
for example, photonic reservoir computing and quantum mechanical 
implementations143. Quantum GANs144–146 have been proposed as an 
alternative to GANs as they are able to learn underlying probability dis-
tributions with fewer parameters, making them useful in perturbation 
modelling. Similarly, quantum VAEs with quantum circuits as autoen-
coders and classical data compression147,148 or with latent generative 
processes implemented in a quantum Boltzmann machine have been 
implemented and applied on classical benchmarking datasets such as 
MNIST149. Quantum VAE can then be leveraged to potentially improve 
latent representations of cells in generative models for perturbation 
modelling.
Optimal transport has fuelled many applications in spatiotem-
poral modelling of single cells, including inferring cellular trajec-
tory, dynamic modelling of cells, perturbation modelling and more, 
by learning a global transport map between cell states. Recently, a 
quantum computing formulation of the amortized optimization of 
interpretable contextual transportation maps was proposed for pre-
dicting changes in the composition of a cell population due to drug 
perturbations76. In this case, a link between unitary operators and DSMs 
is leveraged to directly compute optimal transport maps through a 
quantum circuit. In another application, neural ODEs are proposed in 
conjunction with optimal transport methods to reconstruct dynam-
ics of cell differentiation150. Quantum dynamics latent neural ODE 
was designed to learn and generate quantum trajectories of open and 
closed quantum systems151. Cell state trajectory can be represented 
as a graph152 and encoded into quantum states using quantum feature 
maps153, and quantum dynamics latent neural ODE can then be used 
to infer trajectories with high accuracy. These quantum equivalents 
of classical methods have the potential to solve the limitations of clas-
sical methods such as lack of generalizability, interpretability and 
tractability, among others.
Integrating single-cell multi-omics and 
discovering meaningful interactions
Single-cell transcriptomics is often integrated with other omics data 
such as genomics, phenomics, epigenomics, proteomics, metabo-
lomics and so on to gain a holistic understanding of cell and tissue 
function154. Integration of different omics modalities is imperative to 
achieve this goal; however, owing to incompleteness of information 
across omics, technological throughput constraints, measurement vari-
ances between devices or simply lack of better technology to measure 
molecular entities, there is a need for novel methods to better explore 
cryptic relationships, probably residing in topological connections 
among important higher-order interactions between the dimensions155. 
Such methods, which leverage manifold alignment, optimal transport 
and tensor decomposition have been proposed to align and integrate 
multimodal, single-cell multi-omics155,156 (Fig. 2 and Table 1). Other 
methods using canonical correlation analysis or non-negative matrix 
factorization find a shared biological space in a lower-dimensional 
embedding of different omics modalities from different cells to inte-
grate datasets77. Graph-based embedding techniques have also been 
employed for multi-omics integration using graph VAEs to learn embed-
dings and then reconstruct and link omics data by aligning cellular 
embeddings157. Integrating multi-omics data to learn GRNs and infer 
results of perturbations while predicting transcription factors provides 
new opportunities to understand the function of cells within tissues158.
Network and graph representations have been extensively applied 
to single-cell, spatial transcriptomics and molecular interaction data 
whether as internal representations for deep learning models or 
as cellular and molecular networks159,160. These data have given rise to 
so-called quantum network medicine161 principles, which are typically 
used to investigate the molecular complexity of a particular disease 
or the molecular relationships among apparently distinct pheno-
types from network topologies. However, such networks are vastly 
incomplete, with large proportions of the true interactions being 
still unknown162. To efficiently search for new drugs, drug combina-
tions, host–pathogen interactions and so on within and between cells, 
computational methods are required that can access the immense, 
largely unexplored molecular space. Quantum computing may be 
a key ingredient in enabling the full potential of network medicine 
(Table 1) through quantum network medicine163. This approach has 
already proven successful in performing link prediction based on 
continuous-time quantum walks163 and has been successfully adapted 
to identify disease modules and new disease pathways164.
TDA and cumulants extend the analysis of data topologies to cap-
ture hidden structures from the shape of data and from dth order 
interactions representing complex associations, leading to logical 
relationships in phenotypes, for example, interactions between collec-
tives of cells, features or alterations that lead to therapeutic response165. 
TDA is used in computer vision and atomistic models, and cumulants 
of order d > 3 have important roles, including in financial data analy-
ses and hyper-spectral image analyses. Cumulants are also useful for 
integrating and analysing multi-omics data165,166, whether single-cell or 
patient omics data, where they can provide a unique measurement of 
liability or risk of a given disease or trait, for each cell or individual167. 
The distance between meta-features from cumulants can be calculated 
and TDA applied to generate the topological features that character-
ize the clusters of features168. This methodology aids in uncovering 
intricate patterns and relationships that may be elusive through con-
ventional statistical methods. Given strong correlations in healthcare 
data, high-order cumulants help filter out spurious low-order effects 
that vanish when variables are independent169, leading to successful 
applications in constructing aggregated phenotypes that represent 
distinct pathways in complex diseases165,170.
QTDA and quantum cumulant calculations can potentially detect 
features and higher-order interactions efficiently, especially for regres-
sion and classification tasks (Table 1). Traditional challenges in TDA and 
cumulant computation come from the exponential growth of possible 
feature combinations in high-dimensional data. The first QTDA algo-
rithm specifically targeted situations with high-dimensional features 
and provided an exponential speedup compared with classical TDA101,171. 

Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology
Roadmap
Other ways of obtaining higher-order latent relationships from 
single-cell multi-omics data require tensor decomposition methods172. 
Quantum tensor decomposition methods have been proposed that 
have provable quartic speedup with respect to classical counterparts173, 
with potential implementation in PFTQD for biomedical data analysis174 
(Table 1) using variational quantum algorithms or by adapting 
a quantum approximate optimization algorithm175. These bio-topological 
techniques applied to spatial single-cell omics data would make pos-
sible the capture of those cryptic interactions, which would have been 
hidden with even complete biological measurements, let alone with 
incomplete measurements encountered in practice, to better inform 
the spatiotemporal models described above.
Learning from limited samples
Despite the wealth of information generated from single-cell assays, 
including spatial and temporal, the availability of biological samples, 
particularly human samples, remains limited. Consequently, captur-
ing cellular and molecular diversity across diseases and patient groups 
is challenging, hindering the development of models that reflect diverse 
phenotypes and populations. Even with acquired samples, the cost to 
perform single-cell or spatial assays is prohibitive for large-scale studies 
without large consortium efforts. The Human Cell Atlas7,8 contains data 
from approximately 63 million cells from just over 9,000 donors for a 
gene number of ~20,000 and an even larger number of proteins, mak-
ing the problem hard to solve classically as there are far more variables 
than observations.
Assumptions about generalizing from limited biological sam-
ples remain common, but as high-resolution technologies expand 
the feature space, there is a growing need for methods that better 
address missing data and limited sample size. Imputation and genera-
tive tools are natural avenues to mitigate some of these challenges. 
There have been several recent efforts for imputation of data dropout 
in scRNA-seq176. These tools are also being deployed in the generation 
of scRNA-seq data to overcome the limitations of low availability of 
biological samples177. Quantum GANs have been used to generate 
classical data144,178, aid in small molecule design146,179 and generate 
images180, as well as to learn the underlying probability distributions to 
enable efficient loading into a quantum state145. These methods enable 
learning data distributions with fewer parameters than classical GANs 
and have the potential of searching for an exponentially growing space 
that would be difficult for analysis by classical methods.
Effective training of classical ML algorithms requires large 
amounts of data, but when there are too few training samples as often 
occurs in biology, we can look towards to quantum computation as an 
alternative. In highly data-constrained settings, QNNs may offer cer-
tain advantages. Certain QNN architectures have been shown to have 
greater expressivity than some of their classical counterparts, allowing 
them to capture more complex probability distributions and indicating 
to potential speedups in training time181. Moreover, QCNNs, a subclass 
of QNNs, possess valuable characteristics for QML, including vari-
ational parameters scaling logarithmically in qubit count, resistance to 
barren plateaux during training69 and potential to generate lower levels 
of generalization errors even in the case of limited training data52. In 
practice, we see that a QCNN can achieve comparable performance to 
CNNs while using orders of magnitude fewer trainable parameters70,182, 
lending towards reduced risk of overfitting and greater generalization 
potential. However, a considerable hurdle to the practical application 
of certain QML algorithms is the nature of data requirements and the 
associated ‘state preparation’ overhead. Unlike classical ML, QML 
requires classical information to be encoded into a quantum state, 
that is, state preparation, which can be computationally intensive and 
overshadow any gain from the quantum computation183–185. Addressing 
this challenge requires innovative data encoding and state preparation 
techniques that minimize circuit complexity and will probably require 
domain knowledge to yield an effective heuristic for circuit design.
A quantum-enabled multimodal cellular 
model use case
As each of the computational threads that contribute to the develop-
ment of a spatiotemporal cellular model (Fig. 2) is advanced through 
both classical and quantum computing techniques, we can look towards 
applications that would benefit from the combinations of techniques 
to gain deeper biological insights. One example would be applications 
for cell-based therapeutics186. Although still considered the gold stand-
ard, the target-centric approach to drug discovery appears to be falling 
short on delivering substantial numbers of therapeutic advances187, 
which may be attributed to the complexity of and uncertainty in target 
validation and off-target effects188,189. A cell-based approach to under-
standing perturbation responses and disease behaviours presents 
a unique opportunity for multiple quantum and quantum–classical 
optimization and ML techniques to be brought together to address 
these challenges and further advance cell-centric therapeutic strate-
gies. Figure 3 depicts how three research trajectories may capture 
complementary aspects of the cell-based approach, converging in a 
cancer use case. These include methodologies for engineering cells 
for immunotherapy, developing models of spatiotemporal cellular 
behaviour and extracting dth order feature interactions that would 
inform cellular behaviour. Each of these threads require advancements 
in the different computational efforts described in Fig. 3 and Table 1.
Designing cells for immunotherapy, such as chimeric antigen 
receptor (CAR)-T cells, is fundamentally a sample-constrained prob-
lem because of the high cost and time to generate these cells and the 
relatively large combinatorial space of intracellular signalling domains 
used in their construction. QCNNs could address this data limited 
problem and may scale better on quantum devices than QNNs. How-
ever, their applicability, as well as that of other quantum variational ML 
methods, might be constrained by challenges with state preparation, 
deep circuit structures more susceptible to accumulation of noise, and 
extended quantum device usage. These limitations could render such 
methods less practical for larger, more expressive circuits in PFQTD. 
In such cases, alternative hybrid classical–quantum methods may be 
necessary. For instance, projected quantum kernels190,191 combines 
quantum encoding of features with classical ML algorithms to learn 
with relatively shallow circuits and without the need of performing 
optimization of the circuit parameters.
Spatiotemporal cellular models require many of the computa-
tional tools previously described to capture and characterize the cells 
and cell types in a tumour microenvironment, from which models can 
be developed to predict cellular behaviour as the disease progresses or 
a therapeutic is introduced, such as a CAR-T cell. GNNs or autoencod-
ers may be best suited for the ingestion of data and embedding into 
a latent space. With this latent representation a quantum algorithm 
can be incorporated to determine whether the performance can be 
enhanced. Quantum algorithms such as QCNN, VQC or quantum sup-
port vector machines can be used to train a variational model, albeit 
with certain challenges as noted above. Alternatively, methods such 
as quantum doubly stochastic transformers can be applied, which 
uses quantum computing for a specific portion of the transformer 

Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology
Roadmap
Glossary
Ansatz
A parameterized quantum circuit 
used to approximate a target state or 
operation. In variational algorithms, its 
design and initialization crucially affect 
the accuracy and efficiency of the 
solution.
Continuous-time quantum 
walk
The quantum analogue of random walk, 
in which the evolution of a quantum 
system over a graph is continuous in 
time offering advantages in exploring 
complex networks and solving 
combinatorial problems.
Cumulants
Statistical measures that generalize 
moments to quantify higher-order 
correlations and dependencies among 
random variables. They isolate intrinsic 
multiway interactions, capturing 
nonlinear and non-Gaussian structure 
that ordinary moments or pairwise 
correlations cannot represent.
Curse of dimensionality
The exponential increase in data 
sparsity and computational complexity 
as the number of features grow. This 
phenomenon makes it harder for 
algorithms to detect meaningful 
patterns and they often require vastly 
more data for reliable analysis.
Dynamic circuits
A quantum circuit that incorporates 
classical processing within the 
coherence time of the qubits permitting 
mid-circuit measurements to enable 
feedforward operations such as using 
measured values to determine the next 
gates to be applied.
Ensemble learning
A machine learning technique that 
aggregates multiple individual models 
(known as ‘weak learners’) to produce 
a strong overall model with high 
prediction accuracy and robustness.
Entanglement
A uniquely quantum phenomenon, 
in which the states of two or more 
particles become interdependent; 
consequently measurement of one 
entangled particle instantaneously 
affects the state of the other particle.
Exponential speedup
A performance improvement of an 
algorithm whereby running time 
decreases exponentially compared 
to the state-of-the-art algorithmic 
benchmark.
Fidelities of 1-qubit and 
2-qubit gates
Accuracies in quantum operations 
that create entanglement between 
qubits in a 2-qubit gate. If reduced, the 
effectiveness of quantum computations 
is decreased, and the complexity of 
solved problems is more limited.
Graph neural networks
(GNNs). A class of neural networks 
designed for graph-structured data, 
which aggregate and update node 
features based on neighbouring nodes 
while learning both local and global 
graph properties.
Kernel methods
A class of algorithms that use kernel 
functions, enabling them to transform 
data features to a high-dimensional, 
implicit feature space without 
exactly computing coordinates in the 
transformed feature space.
k-means
An unsupervised algorithm that 
partitions data into k clusters by 
assigning each point to the nearest 
centroid. k-means iteratively minimizes 
within-cluster variance and is widely 
used in unsupervised learning.
Laplacian
A matrix representation of graph 
connectivity that combines degree 
and adjacency matrices of the graph, 
enabling spectral clustering and 
dimensionality reduction of graphs.
Logical qubits
A higher-level abstraction of qubits 
used in a fault-tolerant quantum device 
where a single qubit is encoded using 
a collection of physical qubits while 
protecting quantum information 
from errors.
Neutral atom qubits
Qubits encoding quantum information 
in the internal states of individual, 
electrically neutral atoms held in 
optical or magnetic traps, offering long 
coherence times and scalability for 
quantum computing applications.
Nondeterministic 
polynomial-hard
A class of computational problems 
that are at least as hard as problems 
in the nondeterministic polynomial 
complexity class, meaning that finding 
an efficient solution for them would 
imply efficient solutions for all problem 
in nondeterministic polynomial.
Non-negative matrix 
factorization
A linear algebraic method to factor 
a data matrix V to two lower-rank 
non-negative matrices W and H 
representing parts of the original  
data matrix.
Optimal transport
A mathematical framework for finding 
the most cost-effective map from one 
probability distribution to another.
Quantum approximate 
optimization algorithm
A quantum algorithm that produces 
approximate solutions for combinatorial 
optimization problems.
Quantum circuits
Structured sequences of quantum 
gates operating on qubits to perform 
quantum computation.
Quantum convolutional 
neural networks
(QCNN). The quantum analogue of 
convolutional neural networks, in which 
quantum circuits perform convolution 
and pooling operations; it efficiently 
extracts hierarchical features from 
quantum data and has applications in 
quantum state classification and error 
correction.
Quantum network medicine
An emerging interdisciplinary field that 
leverages quantum computing and 
network science to analyse complex 
biological systems by applying 
quantum-enhanced techniques to 
biological interactions and reveal 
insights into disease mechanism and 
biomarker discovery.
Quantum neural network
(QNN). A quantum machine learning 
model that utilizes parameterized 
quantum circuits inspired by classical 
neural networks.
Qubits
The basic units of quantum information, 
analogous to classical bits. Unlike 
bits, qubits exist in a combination or 
superposition of 0 and 1 simultaneously, 
providing the foundation for quantum 
algorithms that can process information 
leveraging fundamentals of quantum 
mechanics.
Random walk
A stochastic process in which a 
walker on a graph starts at a vertex 
and repeatedly moves to one of its 
neighbouring vertices, chosen at 
random, generating a path through  
the vertices.
Sample limited
Refers to problems that are highly 
constrained in the number of samples, 
particularly with respect to the size of 
the feature space.

Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology
Roadmap
model and has shown benefit for vision transformers71. Such hybrid 
classical–quantum methods may offer a path to developing more 
accurate models.
Both cell engineering and spatiotemporal modelling would be 
enhanced by capturing the high-order interactions that would be 
present in the data given the complexity of biological systems and 
the hidden correlations present in biological data. These high-order 
latent interactions can be detected using quantum cumulants, QTDA 
or quantum tensor decomposition. Such methods capable of taking 
advantage of structures in the data would enable the capture of com-
plex, hidden interactions that may be overlooked even if more complete 
data were available. The confluence of these methods can be used to 
develop cell-based precision medicine by modelling disease microen-
vironments at single-cell resolution to identify therapeutics, biologics 
or other interventions that modify the cellular disease ecosystem to 
make it more responsive to therapy or shift cells to a quiescent or even 
dying state.
Conclusion and future perspective
Although the state of quantum computing has progressed rapidly 
within the past ten years from small scale experiments with a few qubits 
to utility scale quantum computers with over 100 qubits commer-
cially available, there remain key challenges that require considerable 
consideration ahead of near-term applications and careful planning 
for long term success given the trajectory of quantum technologies 
(Fig. 1). It is expected that in four years, with 200 error-corrected 
logical qubits capable of running 100 million gates will be available 
(as laid out in the IBM Quantum roadmap)192,193. This advancement will 
be complemented by similar efforts to scale quantum devices spanning 
various technologies such as superconducting, trapped-ion, neutral 
atom and photonic qubits, by a host of companies and institutions193. 
These systems will substantially improve in error correction, coher-
ence times, gate fidelities, execution times and qubit quality towards 
developing fault-tolerant quantum systems194,195 and quantum cen-
tric supercomputers194,196,197, which would seamlessly integrate AI, 
high-performance computing and quantum computers. Although 
there is clear promise in the future of quantum computing hardware, 
we must account for its current limitations and remain adaptable to this 
rapidly evolving technological field where new insights and challenges 
are being discovered routinely.
State-of-the-art variational QML algorithms can be challenged 
to learn at scale, despite advancements in error mitigation, fractional 
gates and dynamic circuits. Within QML, the relatively limited number 
of qubits or circuit execution times often necessitates operating in 
a lower-dimensional feature or sample space, respectively, through 
methods such as subsampling or projection, which may introduce their 
own biases or information loss. Methods such as quantum support vec-
tor machines can have their circuit depth grow dramatically with qubit 
numbers, which can quickly exceed the coherence times of available 
quantum systems. In some cases, the learning task can be reformulated 
into an optimization task using methods such as quantum approximate 
optimization algorithms198–200 or using a hybrid quantum–classical 
task such as projected quantum kernels190,191, both of which have found 
success on PFTQD owing to features such as relatively shallow circuits. 
Additional hybrid quantum–classical methodologies, which may use a 
classical AI-based method to generate lower-dimensional embeddings 
and variational quantum algorithms to generate quantum feature maps 
on which to perform prediction and classification tasks, have shown 
utility in PFTQD201,202.
Despite their popularity in PFTQD, variational algorithms have 
limitations such as barren plateaux, where gradients vanish exponen-
tially during the optimization process with growing system size203. 
Spin qubits
Qubits storing quantum information in 
the intrinsic spin states of particles like 
electrons or nuclei, often implemented 
in semiconductor quantum dots and 
controlled through magnetic or electric 
fields for quantum operations.
Superconducting qubits
Qubits that can exist in multiple 
states simultaneously based on 
superconducting circuits operating at 
extremely low temperatures to minimize 
thermal noise and maintain coherence, 
enabling fast gate operations for 
high-speed quantum computations.
Superposition
A fundamental principle in quantum 
mechanics stating that a quantum 
system can exist in multiple states 
simultaneously.
Tensor decomposition
A generalization of matrix factorization 
to multidimensional arrays or 
tensors, decomposed into latent 
lower-dimensional factors that capture 
key patterns in complex data.
Topological data analysis
(TDA). A mathematical method 
rooted in algebraic topology that 
analyses the inherent structure of data 
to reveal clusters, holes and voids 
in high-dimensional datasets that 
conventional data analysis techniques 
typically overlook.
Topological qubits
Quantum bits encoded in non-local 
properties of topological quantum 
systems, making them inherently 
resistant to local noise and 
decoherence.
Transformer networks
A deep learning architecture that 
uses self-attention mechanisms to 
capture long-range dependencies 
within a sequence and to draw 
inference.
Trapped-ion Qubits
Qubits that encode information 
in the electronic and nuclear spin 
states of individual ions, controlled 
using electromagnetic fields enabling 
long coherence times, making them 
suitable for high-accuracy quantum 
operations.
Variational quantum  
classifiers
(VQC). A quantum machine learning 
model that uses parameterized 
quantum circuits to classify data, 
with parameters optimized through 
a classical optimization method to 
minimize a cost function.
Glossary (continued)

Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology
Roadmap
Another challenge is the choice of ansatz in these algorithms, where a 
hardware-efficient ansatz may not accurately represent the quantum 
algorithm modelled on the data or may be impractical in PFTQD204. As 
quantum hardware matures, quantum algorithms operating in native 
data spaces may outperform classical methods, enabling solutions to 
problems with sharp complexity phase transitions, such as high-order 
computations in tensor decompositions, TDA or cumulants, which are 
beyond the grasp of classical computing186.
Alongside quantum computing, there are ongoing efforts in 
quantum-inspired and dequantized algorithms to identify quantum 
advantages and adapt them to enhance classical methods without 
the overhead of quantum state preparation205,206, thereby removing 
theoretical exponential speedups. The bulk of dequantized algorithms 
pertain to quantum linear algebra algorithms that assume a low-rank 
input data given classically207. This low-rank assumption enables classi-
cal algorithms to achieve similar performance to quantum algorithms 
in the form of randomized algorithms that permit matrix sketching 
and dimensionality reduction akin to the quantum state preparation 
of quantum algorithms205,206. These dequantization methodologies can 
still permit large polynomial speedups, which in practice could have 
considerable benefits for the healthcare and life sciences communi-
ties. The quantum-inspired algorithms related to the dequantization 
efforts have indeed shown an exponential speedup, though at the cost 
of a large polynomial overhead and of quickly degrading performance 
as the dimension, rank and condition number of the input matrix 
increases205.
Furthermore, any performance assessment of a quantum algo-
rithm will require rigorous testing and benchmarking. Such bench-
marking can focus on classes of problems that are known to be difficult 
to solve classically and therefore represent opportunities for a quan-
tum algorithm to perform better, as has been proposed for optimiza-
tion problems208. A similar benchmarking suite would prove invaluable 
for other classes of quantum algorithms, including QML and quantum 
simulation, to demonstrate where quantum computing may have the 
most impact. It is evident that the field of quantum computing is rapidly 
evolving to understand under what conditions it can offer meaningful 
performance gains for healthcare and life science, gains that may be 
measured in faster computation, whether exponential or polynomial, 
or in increased accuracy.
Single-cell and spatial single-cell technologies have opened a vast 
array of opportunities to advance biological insights and therapeutic 
design. These opportunities have been made possible by tremendous 
advancements in computational tools and techniques. These tools 
have been entirely classical up to this point, but as quantum comput-
ing is rapidly developing, we are now at a point where exploring how 
quantum computation can work together with classical computation 
to promote new discoveries is a reality. Quantum computing has the 
potential to become a powerful enabling technology to help push 
single-cell, spatial single-cell and new therapeutics models forward.
Published online: xx xx xxxx
References
1.	
Method of the year 2013. Nat. Methods 11, 1 (2014).
2.	
Marx, V. Method of the year: spatially resolved transcriptomics. Nat. Methods 18, 9–14 
(2021).
3.	
Method of the year 2024: spatial proteomics. Nat. Methods 21, 2195–2196 (2024).
4.	
The Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network et al. The cancer genome atlas pan-cancer 
analysis project. Nat. Genet. 45, 1113–1120 (2013).
5.	
de Bruijn, I. et al. Sharing data from the Human Tumor Atlas Network through standards, 
infrastructure and community engagement. Nat. Methods 22, 664–671 (2025).
6.	
Jain, S. et al. Advances and prospects for the Human BioMolecular Atlas Program 
(HuBMAP). Nat. Cell Biol. 25, 1089–1100 (2023).
7.	
Rozenblatt-Rosen, O., Stubbington, M. J., Regev, A. & Teichmann, S. A. The Human Cell 
Atlas: from vision to reality. Nature 550, 451–453 (2017).
8.	
Regev, A. et al. The human cell atlas. eLife 6, e27041 (2017).
9.	
Zhang, J. et al. Tahoe-100M: a giga-scale single-cell perturbation atlas for context- 
dependent gene function and cellular modeling. Preprint at bioRxiv https://doi.org/ 
10.1101/2025.02.20.639398 (2025).
10.	
Klughammer, J. et al. A multi-modal single-cell and spatial expression map of metastatic 
breast cancer biopsies across clinicopathological features. Nat. Med. 30, 3236–3249 
(2024).
11.	
Mo, C. K. et al. Tumour evolution and microenvironment interactions in 2D and 3D space. 
Nature 634, 1178–1186 (2024).
12.	
Greenbaum, S. et al. A spatially resolved timeline of the human maternal–fetal interface. 
Nature 619, 595–605 (2023).
13.	
Ren, J. et al. Spatiotemporally resolved transcriptomics reveals the subcellular RNA 
kinetic landscape. Nat. Methods 20, 695–705 (2023).
14.	
Wagner, J. et al. A single-cell atlas of the tumor and immune ecosystem of human breast 
cancer. Cell 177, 1330–1345 (2019).
15.	
Paik, D. T., Cho, S., Tian, L., Chang, H. Y. & Wu, J. C. Single-cell RNA sequencing in 
cardiovascular development, disease and medicine. Nat. Rev. Cardiol. 17, 457–473 
(2020).
16.	
Segerstolpe, Å et al. Single-cell transcriptome profiling of human pancreatic islets in 
health and type 2 diabetes. Cell Metab. 24, 593–607 (2016).
17.	
Li, H. et al. A comprehensive benchmarking with practical guidelines for cellular 
deconvolution of spatial transcriptomics. Nat. Commun. 14, 1548 (2023).
18.	
Dill, K. A. & MacCallum, J. L. The protein-folding problem, 50 years on. Science 338, 
1042–1046 (2012).
19.	
Jumper, J. et al. Highly accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold. Nature 596, 
583–589 (2021).
20.	 Humphreys, I. R. et al. Computed structures of core eukaryotic protein complexes. 
Science 374, eabm4805 (2021).
21.	
Bryant, P. et al. Predicting the structure of large protein complexes using AlphaFold and 
Monte Carlo tree search. Nat. Commun. 13, 6028 (2022).
22.	 Mazurenko, S., Prokop, Z. & Damborsky, J. Machine learning in enzyme engineering. 
ACS Catal. 10, 1210–1223 (2019).
23.	 Dauparas, J. et al. Robust deep learning–based protein sequence design using 
ProteinMPNN. Science 378, 49–56 (2022).
24.	 Zhou, J. & Troyanskaya, O. G. Predicting effects of noncoding variants with deep 
learning–based sequence model. Nat. Methods 12, 931–934 (2015).
25.	 Greenwald, N. F. et al. Whole-cell segmentation of tissue images with human-level 
performance using large-scale data annotation and deep learning. Nat. Biotechnol. 40, 
555–565 (2022).
26.	 Esteva, A. et al. Dermatologist-level classification of skin cancer with deep neural 
networks. Nature 542, 115–118 (2017).
27.	
Ardila, D. et al. End-to-end lung cancer screening with three-dimensional deep learning 
on low-dose chest computed tomography. Nat. Med. 25, 954–961 (2019).
28.	 Zeng, Z., Li, Y., Li, Y. & Luo, Y. Statistical and machine learning methods for spatially 
resolved transcriptomics data analysis. Genome Biol. 23, 83 (2022).
29.	 Kelly, C. J., Karthikesalingam, A., Suleyman, M., Corrado, G. & King, D. Key challenges for 
delivering clinical impact with artificial intelligence. BMC Med. 17, 1–9 (2019).
30.	 Greener, J. G., Kandathil, S. M., Moffat, L. & Jones, D. T. A guide to machine learning for 
biologists. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 23, 40–55 (2022).
31.	
Biancalani, T. et al. Deep learning and alignment of spatially resolved single-cell 
transcriptomes with Tangram. Nat. Methods 18, 1352–1362 (2021).
32.	 Tung, P.-Y. et al. Batch effects and the effective design of single-cell gene expression 
studies. Sci. Rep. 7, 39921 (2017).
33.	 Saelens, W., Cannoodt, R., Todorov, H. & Saeys, Y. A comparison of single-cell trajectory 
inference methods. Nat. Biotechnol. 37, 547–554 (2019).
34.	 Dirac, P. A. M. The Principles of Quantum Mechanics (Oxford Univ. Press, 1981).
35.	 Heisenberg, W. in Physicist’s Conception of Nature (ed. Heisenberg, W.) (Harcourt, Brace 
& co., 1958).
36.	 Levine, H. et al. Parallel implementation of high-fidelity multiqubit gates with neutral 
atoms. Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, 170503 (2019).
37.	
Burkard, G., Ladd, T. D., Pan, A., Nichol, J. M. & Petta, J. R. Semiconductor spin qubits. 
Rev. Mod. Phys. 95, 025003 (2023).
38.	 Conlon, A., Pellegrino, D., Slingerland, J. K., Dooley, S. & Kells, G. Error generation and 
propagation in Majorana-based topological qubits. Phys. Rev. B 100, 134307 (2019).
39.	 Kozhanov, A. et al. Next-generation trapped-ion quantum computing system. In Optica 
Quantum 2.0 Conference and Exhibition QM3A-2 (Optical Publishing Group, 2023).
40.	 Bravyi, S., Dial, O., Gambetta, J. M., Gil, D. & Nazario, Z. The future of quantum computing 
with superconducting qubits. J. Appl. Phys. 132, 160902 (2022).
41.	
Chamberland, C. et al. Building a fault-tolerant quantum computer using concatenated 
cat codes. PRX Quantum 3, 010329 (2022).
42.	 Martinis, J. M. Surface loss calculations and design of a superconducting transmon qubit 
with tapered wiring. npj Quantum Inf. 8, 26 (2022).
43.	 Chow, J., Dial, O. & Gambetta, J. IBM quantum breaks the 100-qubit processor barrier. 
IBM Research Blog https://www.ibm.com/quantum/blog/127-qubit-quantum- 
processor-eagle (2022).

Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology
Roadmap
44.	 Google Quantum, A. I. & Collaborators Quantum error correction below the surface 
code threshold. Nature 638, 920–926 (2025).
45.	 Bravyi, S. et al. High-threshold and low-overhead fault-tolerant quantum memory. Nature 
627, 778–782 (2024).
46.	 Cross, A. et al. OpenQASM 3: a broader and deeper quantum assembly language.  
ACM Trans. Quantum Comput. 3, 1–50 (2022).
47.	
Jurcevic, P. et al. Demonstration of quantum volume 64 on a superconducting quantum 
computing system. Quantum Sci. Technol. 6, 025020 (2021).
48.	 Piveteau, C. & Sutter, D. Circuit knitting with classical communication. IEEE Trans. Inf. 
Theor. 70, 2734–2745 (2024).
49.	 Patti, T. L., Shehab, O., Najafi, K. & Yelin, S. F. Markov chain Monte Carlo enhanced 
variational quantum algorithms. Quantum Sci. Technol. 8, 015019 (2022).
50.	 Van Den Berg, E., Minev, Z. K., Kandala, A. & Temme, K. Probabilistic error cancellation 
with sparse Pauli–Lindblad models on noisy quantum processors. Nat. Phys. 19, 1116–1121 
(2023).
51.	
Kim, Y. et al. Scalable error mitigation for noisy quantum circuits produces competitive 
expectation values. Nat. Phys. 19, 752–759 (2023).
52.	 Caro, M. C. et al. Generalization in quantum machine learning from few training data. 
Nat. Commun. 13, 4919 (2022).
53.	 Cerezo, M., Verdon, G., Huang, H.-Y., Cincio, L. & Coles, P. J. Challenges and opportunities 
in quantum machine learning. Nat. Comput. Sci. 2, 567–576 (2022).
54.	 Abbas, A. et al. Challenges and opportunities in quantum optimization. Nat. Rev. Phys. 6, 
718–735 (2024).
55.	 Krunic, Z., Flöther, F. F., Seegan, G., Earnest-Noble, N. D. & Shehab, O. Quantum kernels 
for real-world predictions based on electronic health records. IEEE Trans. Quantum Eng. 
3, 1–11 (2022).
56.	 Utro, F., Bose, A., Wang, R., Dubovitskii, V. & Parida, L. A perspective on quantum 
computing for analyzing cell-cell communication networks. In Conference on Intelligent 
Systems for Molecular Biology (ISMB, 2024).
57.	
Doga, H. et al. How can quantum computing be applied in clinical trial design and 
optimization? Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 45, 880–891 (2024).
58.	 Doga, H. et al. A perspective on protein structure prediction using quantum computers. 
J. Chem. Theory Comput. 20, 3359–3378 (2024).
59.	 Flöther, F. F. et al. How quantum computing can enhance biomarker discovery. Patterns 
6, 101236 (2025).
60.	 Dubovitskii, V., Bose, A., Utro, F. & Pardia, L. On quantum random walks in biomolecular 
networks. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2506.06514 (2025).
61.	
Moses, L. & Pachter, L. Museum of spatial transcriptomics. Nat. Methods 19, 534–546 (2022).
62.	 Wang, Z. Cell segmentation for image cytometry: advances, insufficiencies, and 
challenges. Cytom. A 95, 708–711 (2019).
63.	 Pang, M., Roy, T. K., Wu, X. & Tan, K. CelloType: a unified model for segmentation and 
classification of tissue images. Nat. Methods 22, 348–357 (2025).
64.	 Petukhov, V. et al. Cell segmentation in imaging-based spatial transcriptomics.  
Nat. Biotechnol. 40, 345–354 (2022).
65.	 Chen, H., Li, D. & Bar-Joseph, Z. SCS: cell segmentation for high-resolution spatial 
transcriptomics. Nat. Methods 20, 1237–1243 (2023).
66.	 Moen, E. et al. Deep learning for cellular image analysis. Nat. Methods 16, 1233–1246 (2019).
67.	
Walker, B. L., Cang, Z., Ren, H., Bourgain-Chang, E. & Nie, Q. Deciphering tissue structure 
and function using spatial transcriptomics. Commun. Biol. 5, 220 (2022).
68.	 Nitzan, M., Karaiskos, N., Friedman, N. & Rajewsky, N. Gene expression cartography. 
Nature 576, 132–137 (2019).
69.	 Pesah, A. et al. Absence of barren plateaus in quantum convolutional neural networks. 
Phys. Rev. X 11, 041011 (2021).
70.	 Hur, T., Kim, L. & Park, D. K. Quantum convolutional neural network for classical data 
classification. Quantum Mach. Intell. 4, 3 (2022).
71.	
Born, J. et al. Quantum doubly stochastic transformers. Preprint at https://doi.org/ 
10.48550/arXiv.2504.16275 (2025).
72.	 Zhao, L., Wan, L. & Luo, M.-X. Quantum algorithm for Markov Random Fields structure 
learning by information theoretic properties. Phys. Scr. 100, 075121 (2025).
73.	 Khatri, N., Matos, G., Coopmans, L. & Clark, S. Quixer: a quantum transformer model. 
Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2406.04305 (2024).
74.	 Cherrat, E. A. et al. Quantum vision transformers. Quantum 8, 1265 (2024).
75.	 Jayakody, M. N., Meena, C. & Pradhan, P. Revisiting one-dimensional discrete-time 
quantum walks with general coin. Phys. Open. 17, 100189 (2023).
76.	 Mariella, N. et al. Quantum theory and application of contextual optimal transport. In 
Proc. 41st International Conference on Machine Learning Article 1416, 34822–34845 
(ACM, 2024).
77.	
Stuart, T. et al. Comprehensive integration of single-cell data. Cell 177, 1888–1902 e21 (2019).
78.	 Palla, G. et al. Squidpy: a scalable framework for spatial omics analysis. Nat. Methods 19, 
171–178 (2022).
79.	 Dries, R. et al. Giotto: a toolbox for integrative analysis and visualization of spatial 
expression data. Genome Biol. 22, 78 (2021).
80.	 Li, M. M., Huang, K. & Zitnik, M. Graph representation learning in biomedicine and 
healthcare. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 6, 1353–1369 (2022).
81.	
Jaume, G. et al. Quantifying explainers of graph neural networks in computational 
pathology. In Proc. IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 
8106–8116 (CVPR, 2021).
82.	 Liu, T. et al. A comprehensive overview of graph neural network-based approaches to 
clustering for spatial transcriptomics. Comput. Struct. Biotechnol. J. 23, 106–128 (2024).
83.	 Li, Y. & Luo, Y. STdGCN: spatial transcriptomic cell-type deconvolution using graph 
convolutional networks. Genome Biol. 25, 206 (2024).
84.	 Pati, P. et al. Hierarchical graph representations in digital pathology. Med. image Anal. 75, 
102264 (2022).
85.	 Cook, S. A. The complexity of theorem-proving procedures. Log. Autom. Comput. 
Complex. https://doi.org/10.1145/3588287.3588297 (1971).
86.	 Sun, S., Zhu, J. & Zhou, X. Statistical analysis of spatial expression patterns for spatially 
resolved transcriptomic studies. Nat. Methods 17, 193–200 (2020).
87.	
Govek, K. W., Yamajala, V. S. & Camara, P. G. Clustering-independent analysis of genomic 
data using spectral simplicial theory. PLoS Comput. Biol. 15, e1007509 (2019).
88.	 Miller, B. F., Bambah-Mukku, D., Dulac, C., Zhuang, X. & Fan, J. Characterizing spatial 
gene expression heterogeneity in spatially resolved single-cell transcriptomic data with 
nonuniform cellular densities. Genome Res. 31, 1843–1855 (2021).
89.	 Armingol, E., Officer, A., Harismendy, O. & Lewis, N. E. Deciphering cell-cell interactions 
and communication from gene expression. Nat. Rev. Genet. 22, 71–88 (2021).
90.	 Arnol, D., Schapiro, D., Bodenmiller, B., Saez-Rodriguez, J. & Stegle, O. Modeling cell-cell 
interactions from spatial molecular data with spatial variance component analysis.  
Cell Rep. 29, 202–211 e6 (2019).
91.	
Tanevski, J., Flores, R. O. R., Gabor, A., Schapiro, D. & Saez-Rodriguez, J. Explainable 
multiview framework for dissecting spatial relationships from highly multiplexed data. 
Genome Biol. 23, 97 (2022).
92.	 Sahin, M. E. et al. Efficient parameter optimisation for quantum kernel alignment: 
a sub-sampling approach in variational training. Quantum 8, 1502 (2024).
93.	 Ray, A. et al. Hybrid quantum–classical graph neural networks for tumor classification in 
digital pathology. 2024 IEEE Int. Conf. Quantum Comput. Eng. 01, 1611–1616 (2024).
94.	 Mirzasoleiman, B., Bilmes, J. & Leskovec, J. Coresets for data-efficient training of machine 
learning models. In Proc. 37th International Conference on Machine Learning Vol. 119, 
569–579 (PMLR, 2020).
95.	 Layden, D. et al. Quantum-enhanced Markov chain Monte Carlo. Nature 619, 282–287 
(2023).
96.	 Macaluso, A., Clissa, L., Lodi, S. & Sartori, C. An efficient quantum algorithm for ensemble 
classification using bagging. IET Quantum Commun. 5, 253–268 (2024).
97.	
Rhrissorrakrai, K. et al. Quantum ensembling methods for healthcare and life science. 
Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2506.02213 (2025).
98.	 Wang, Y., Wang, X., Qi, B. & Dong, D. Supervised-learning guarantee for quantum 
AdaBoost. Phys. Rev. Appl. 22, 054001 (2024).
99.	 Berry, D. W. et al. Analyzing prospects for quantum advantage in topological data 
analysis. PRX Quantum 5, 010319 (2024).
100.	 Hayakawa, R. Quantum algorithm for persistent Betti numbers and topological data 
analysis. Quantum 6, 873 (2022).
101.	 Lloyd, S., Garnerone, S. & Zanardi, P. Quantum algorithms for topological and geometric 
analysis of data. Nat. Commun. 7, 10138 (2016).
102.	 Ding, J., Sharon, N. & Bar-Joseph, Z. Temporal modelling using single-cell 
transcriptomics. Nat. Rev. Genet. 23, 355–368 (2022).
103.	 La Manno, G. et al. RNA velocity of single cells. Nature 560, 494–498 (2018).
104.	 Trapnell, C. et al. The dynamics and regulators of cell fate decisions are revealed by 
pseudotemporal ordering of single cells. Nat. Biotechnol. 32, 381–386 (2014).
105.	 Bergen, V., Lange, M., Peidli, S., Wolf, F. A. & Theis, F. J. Generalizing RNA velocity to 
transient cell states through dynamical modeling. Nat. Biotechnol. 38, 1408–1414 (2020).
106.	 Teschendorff, A. E. & Enver, T. Single-cell entropy for accurate estimation of 
differentiation potency from a cell’s transcriptome. Nat. Commun. 8, 15599 (2017).
107.	 Wolf, F. A. et al. PAGA: graph abstraction reconciles clustering with trajectory inference 
through a topology preserving map of single cells. Genome Biol. 20, 1–9 (2019).
108.	 Ji, Z. & Ji, H. TSCAN: pseudo-time reconstruction and evaluation in single-cell RNA-seq 
analysis. Nucleic Acids Res. 44, e117 (2016).
109.	 Cao, J. et al. The single-cell transcriptional landscape of mammalian organogenesis. 
Nature 566, 496–502 (2019).
110.	 Schiebinger, G. et al. Optimal-transport analysis of single-cell gene expression identifies 
developmental trajectories in reprogramming. Cell 176, 1517 (2019).
111.	 Tong, A., Huang, J., Wolf, G., van Dijk, D. & Krishnaswamy, S. TrajectoryNet: a dynamic 
optimal transport network for modeling cellular dynamics. Proc. Mach. Learn. Res. 119, 
9526–9536 (2020).
112.	 Chen, R. T., Rubanova, Y., Bettencourt, J. & Duvenaud, D. K. Neural ordinary differential 
equations. In Proc. 32nd International Conference on Neural Information Processing 
System 6572–6583 (ACM, 2018).
113.	 Pham, D. et al. Robust mapping of spatiotemporal trajectories and cell-cell interactions 
in healthy and diseased tissues. Nat. Commun. 14, 7739 (2023).
114.	 Ji, Y., Lotfollahi, M., Wolf, F. A. & Theis, F. J. Machine learning for perturbational single-cell 
omics. Cell Syst. 12, 522–537 (2021).
115.	 Zhang, J., Larschan, E., Bigness, J. & Singh, R. scNODE: generative model for temporal 
single cell transcriptomic data prediction. Bioinformatics 40, ii146–ii154 (2024).
116.	 Lin, C. & Bar-Joseph, Z. Continuous-state HMMs for modeling time-series single-cell 
RNA-seq data. Bioinformatics 35, 4707–4715 (2019).
117.	 Niraula, D., El Naqa, I., Tuszynski, J. A. & Gatenby, R. A. Modeling non-genetic information 
dynamics in cells using reservoir computing. iScience 27, 109614 (2024).
118.	 Hadaeghi, F. et al. Spatio-temporal feature learning with reservoir computing for T-cell 
segmentation in live-cell Ca2+ fluorescence microscopy. Sci. Rep. 11, 8233 (2021).
119.	 Lotfollahi, M., Wolf, F. A. & Theis, F. J. scGen predicts single-cell perturbation responses. 
Nat. Methods 16, 715–721 (2019).

Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology
Roadmap
120.	 Rood, J. E., Hupalowska, A. & Regev, A. Toward a foundation model of causal cell and 
tissue biology with a perturbation cell and tissue atlas. Cell 187, 4520–4545 (2024).
121.	 Jaitin, D. A. et al. Dissecting immune circuits by linking CRISPR-pooled screens with 
single-cell RNA-Seq. Cell 167, 1883–1896 e15 (2016).
122.	 McFarland, J. M. et al. Multiplexed single-cell transcriptional response profiling to define 
cancer vulnerabilities and therapeutic mechanism of action. Nat. Commun. 11, 4296 (2020).
123.	 Frangieh, C. J. et al. Multimodal pooled Perturb-CITE-seq screens in patient models 
define mechanisms of cancer immune evasion. Nat. Genet. 53, 332–341 (2021).
124.	 Xie, S., Duan, J., Li, B., Zhou, P. & Hon, G. C. Multiplexed engineering and analysis of 
combinatorial enhancer activity in single cells. Mol. Cell 66, 285–299 e5 (2017).
125.	 Gavriilidis, G. I., Vasileiou, V., Orfanou, A., Ishaque, N. & Psomopoulos, F. A mini-review on 
perturbation modelling across single-cell omic modalities. Comput. Struct. Biotechnol. J. 
23, 1886–1896 (2024).
126.	 Nicol, P. B. et al. Robust identification of perturbed cell types in single-cell RNA-seq data. 
Nat. Commun. 15, 7610 (2024).
127.	 Dann, E., Henderson, N. C., Teichmann, S. A., Morgan, M. D. & Marioni, J. C. Differential 
abundance testing on single-cell data using k-nearest neighbor graphs. Nat. Biotechnol. 
40, 245–253 (2022).
128.	 Kamimoto, K. et al. Dissecting cell identity via network inference and in silico gene 
perturbation. Nature 614, 742–751 (2023).
129.	 Marouf, M. et al. Realistic in silico generation and augmentation of single-cell RNA-seq 
data using generative adversarial networks. Nat. Commun. 11, 166 (2020).
130.	 Kingma, D. P. Auto-encoding variational bayes. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/
arXiv.1312.6114 (2013).
131.	 Szałata, A. et al. Transformers in single-cell omics: a review and new perspectives.  
Nat. Methods 21, 1430–1443 (2024).
132.	 Bunne, C. et al. Learning single-cell perturbation responses using neural optimal 
transport. Nat. Methods 20, 1759–1768 (2023).
133.	 Bunne, C., Schiebinger, G., Krause, A., Regev, A. & Cuturi, M. Optimal transport for 
single-cell and spatial omics. Nat. Rev. Methods Prim. 4, 58 (2024).
134.	 Cui, H. et al. scGPT: toward building a foundation model for single-cell multi-omics using 
generative AI. Nat. Methods 21, 1470–1480 (2024).
135.	 Fu, X. et al. A foundation model of transcription across human cell types. Nature 637, 
965–973 (2025).
136.	 Hao, M. et al. Large-scale foundation model on single-cell transcriptomics. Nat. Methods 
16, 4679 (2024).
137.	 Heimberg, G. et al. A cell atlas foundation model for scalable search of similar 
human cells. Nature 638, 1085–1094 (2024).
138.	 Ghazanfar, S. et al. Investigating higher-order interactions in single-cell data with scHOT. 
Nat. Methods 17, 799–806 (2020).
139.	 Piatkowski, N. & Zoufal, C. Quantum circuits for discrete graphical models. Quantum 
Mach. Intell. 6, 37 (2024).
140.	 Ghosh, S., Opala, A., Matuszewski, M., Paterek, T. & Liew, T. C. Quantum reservoir 
processing. NPJ Quantum Inf. 5, 35 (2019).
141.	 Lukoševičius, M. A practical guide to applying echo state networks. Neural Netw.  
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-35289-8_36 (2012).
142.	 Tanaka, G. et al. Recent advances in physical reservoir computing: a review. Neural Netw. 
115, 100–123 (2019).
143.	 Zhu, C., Ehlers, P. J., Nurdin, H. I. & Soh, D. Practical few-atom quantum reservoir 
computing. Phys. Rev. Research 7, 023290 (2025).
144.	 Situ, H., He, Z., Wang, Y., Li, L. & Zheng, S. Quantum generative adversarial network for 
generating discrete distribution. Inf. Sci. 538, 193–208 (2020).
145.	 Zoufal, C., Lucchi, A. & Woerner, S. Quantum generative adversarial networks for learning 
and loading random distributions. NPJ Quantum Inf. 5, 103 (2019).
146.	 Kao, P.-Y. et al. Exploring the advantages of quantum generative adversarial networks in 
generative chemistry. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 63, 3307–3318 (2023).
147.	 Wan, K. H., Dahlsten, O., Kristjánsson, H., Gardner, R. & Kim, M. Quantum generalisation 
of feedforward neural networks. NPJ Quantum Inf. 3, 36 (2017).
148.	 Romero, J., Olson, J. P. & Aspuru-Guzik, A. Quantum autoencoders for efficient 
compression of quantum data. Quantum Sci. Technol. 2, 045001 (2017).
149.	 Khoshaman, A. et al. Quantum variational autoencoder. Quantum Sci. Technol. 4, 014001 
(2018).
150.	 Erbe, R., Stein-O’Brien, G. & Fertig, E. J. Transcriptomic forecasting with neural ordinary 
differential equations. Patterns 4, 100793 (2023).
151.	 Choi, M., Flam-Shepherd, D., Kyaw, T. H. & Aspuru-Guzik, A. Learning quantum dynamics 
with latent neural ordinary differential equations. Phys. Rev. A 105, 042403 (2022).
152.	 Stassen, S. V., Yip, G. G. K., Wong, K. K. Y., Ho, J. W. K. & Tsia, K. K. Generalized and 
scalable trajectory inference in single-cell omics data with VIA. Nat. Commun. 12, 5528 
(2021).
153.	 Albrecht, B. et al. Quantum feature maps for graph machine learning on a neutral atom 
quantum processor. Phys. Rev. A 107, 042615 (2023).
154.	 Baysoy, A., Bai, Z., Satija, R. & Fan, R. The technological landscape and applications of 
single-cell multi-omics. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 24, 695–713 (2023).
155.	 Cao, K., Bai, X., Hong, Y. & Wan, L. Unsupervised topological alignment for single-cell 
multi-omics integration. Bioinformatics 36, i48–i56 (2020).
156.	 Wang, R. H., Wang, J. & Li, S. C. Probabilistic tensor decomposition extracts better latent 
embeddings from single-cell multiomic data. Nucleic Acids Res. 51, e81 (2023).
157.	 Cao, Z. J. & Gao, G. Multi-omics single-cell data integration and regulatory inference with 
graph-linked embedding. Nat. Biotechnol. 40, 1458–1466 (2022).
158.	 Kartha, V. K. et al. Functional inference of gene regulation using single-cell multi-omics. 
Cell Genom. 2, 100166 (2022).
159.	 Szklarczyk, D. et al. STRING v11: protein–protein association networks with increased 
coverage, supporting functional discovery in genome-wide experimental datasets. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 47, D607–D613 (2019).
160.	 Ma, A. et al. Single-cell biological network inference using a heterogeneous graph 
transformer. Nat. Commun. 14, 964 (2023).
161.	 Barabasi, A. L., Gulbahce, N. & Loscalzo, J. Network medicine: a network-based approach 
to human disease. Nat. Rev. Genet. 12, 56–68 (2011).
162.	 Luck, K. et al. A reference map of the human binary protein interactome. Nature 580, 
402–408 (2020).
163.	 Maniscalco, S. et al. Quantum network medicine: rethinking medicine with network science 
and quantum algorithms. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2206.12405 (2022).
164.	 Saarinen, H., Goldsmith, M., Wang, R.-S., Loscalzo, J. & Maniscalco, S. Disease gene 
prioritization with quantum walks. Bioinformatics 40, btae513 (2024).
165.	 Bose, A., Platt, D. E., Haiminen, N. & Parida, L. CuNA: cumulant-based network analysis  
of genotype-phenotype associations in Parkinson’s disease. Preprint at medRxiv 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.08.02.21261457 (2021).
166.	 Parida, L. & Ramakrishnan, N. Redescription mining: structure theory and algorithms.  
In Proc. 20th National Conference on Artificial Intelligence Vol. 2 (ACM, 2005).
167.	 Bose, A. & Parida, L. Generating cumulant-based risk scores for diseases. US Patent 
Application No. 202403954 (2023).
168.	 Gurnari, D. et al. Probing omics data via harmonic persistent homology. Sci. Rep. 15, 
38836 (2025).
169.	 Percus, J. K. Correlation inequalities for Ising spin lattices. Commun. Math. Phys. 40, 
283–308 (1975).
170.	 Platt, D. E., Basu, S., Zalloua, P. A. & Parida, L. Characterizing redescriptions using 
persistent homology to isolate genetic pathways contributing to pathogenesis. 
BMC Syst. Biol. 10, S10 (2016).
171.	 Gyurik, C., Cade, C. & Dunjko, V. Towards quantum advantage via topological data 
analysis. Quantum 6, 855 (2022).
172.	 Cui, L., Guo, G., Ng, M. K., Zou, Q. & Qiu, Y. GSTRPCA: irregular tensor singular value 
decomposition for single-cell multi-omics data clustering. Brief. Bioinform. 26, bbae649 
(2024).
173.	 Hastings, M. B. Classical and quantum algorithms for tensor principal component 
analysis. Quantum 4, 237 (2020).
174.	 Burch, M. et al. Towards quantum tensor decomposition in biomedical applications. 
Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2502.13140 (2025).
175.	 Zhou, L., Basso, J. & Mei, S. Statistical estimation in the spiked tensor model via the 
quantum approximate optimization algorithm. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 37, 
28537–28588 (2024).
176.	 Zhu, X., Meng, S., Li, G., Wang, J. & Peng, X. AGImpute: imputation of scRNA-seq data 
based on a hybrid GAN with dropouts identification. Bioinformatics 40, btae068 (2024).
177.	 Xu, Y. et al. scIGANs: single-cell RNA-seq imputation using generative adversarial 
networks. Nucleic Acids Res. 48, e85 (2020).
178.	 Zeng, J., Wu, Y., Liu, J.-G., Wang, L. & Hu, J. Learning and inference on generative 
adversarial quantum circuits. Phys. Rev. A 99, 052306 (2019).
179.	 Li, J., Topaloglu, R. O. & Ghosh, S. Quantum generative models for small molecule drug 
discovery. IEEE Trans. Quantum Eng. 2, 1–8 (2021).
180.	 Huang, H.-L. et al. Experimental quantum generative adversarial networks for image 
generation. Phys. Rev. Appl. 16, 024051 (2021).
181.	 Abbas, A. et al. The power of quantum neural networks. Nat. Comput. Sci. 1, 403–409 
(2021).
182.	 Peters, R. et al. Quantum Convolutional HLA Immunogenic Peptide Prediction (Q-CHIPP): 
next-generation neoantigen prediction with quantum neural networks. Preprint at 
bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.29.667313 (2025).
183.	 Shende, V. V., Bullock, S. S. & Markov, I. L. Synthesis of quantum-logic circuits. IEEE Trans. 
Comput. Aided Des. Integr. Circuits Syst. 25, 1000–1010 (2006).
184.	 Plesch, M. & Brukner, Č Quantum-state preparation with universal gate decompositions. 
Phys. Rev. A 83, 032302 (2011).
185.	 Zhang, X.-M., Li, T. & Yuan, X. Quantum state preparation with optimal circuit depth: 
implementations and applications. Phys. Rev. Lett. 129, 230504 (2022).
186.	 Basu, S. et al. Towards quantum-enabled cell-centric therapeutics. Preprint at 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2307.05734 (2023).
187.	 Moffat, J. G., Vincent, F., Lee, J. A., Eder, J. & Prunotto, M. Opportunities and challenges in 
phenotypic drug discovery: an industry perspective. Nat. Rev. Drug. Discov. 16, 531–543 
(2017).
188.	 Lin, A. et al. Off-target toxicity is a common mechanism of action of cancer drugs 
undergoing clinical trials. Sci. Transl. Med. 11, eaaw8412 (2019).
189.	 Sams-Dodd, F. Target-based drug discovery: is something wrong? Drug. Discov. today 10, 
139–147 (2005).
190.	 Huang, H.-Y. et al. Power of data in quantum machine learning. Nat. Commun. 12, 2631 (2021).
191.	 Utro, F. et al. Enhanced prediction of CAR T-Cell cytotoxicity with quantum-kernel 
methods. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2507.22710 (2025).
192.	 Gambetta, J. Expanding the IBM Quantum roadmap to anticipate the future of 
quantum-centric supercomputing. IBM Research Blog https://www.ibm.com/quantum/
blog/ibm-quantum-roadmap-2025 (2022).
193.	 AbuGhanem, M. IBM quantum computers: evolution, performance, and future directions. 
J. Supercomput. 81, 687 (2025).

Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology
Roadmap
194.	 Yoder, T. J. et al. Tour de gross: a modular quantum computer based on bivariate bicycle 
codes. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2506.03094 (2025).
195.	 Müller, T. et al. Improved belief propagation is sufficient for real-time decoding of 
quantum memory. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2506.01779 (2025).
196.	 Mohseni, M. et al. How to build a quantum supercomputer: scaling challenges and 
opportunities. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2411.10406 (2024).
197.	 Robledo-Moreno, J. et al. Chemistry beyond the scale of exact diagonalization on a 
quantum-centric supercomputer. Sci. Adv. 11, eadu9991 (2025).
198.	 Ding, Q.-M., Huang, Y.-M. & Yuan, X. Molecular docking via quantum approximate 
optimization algorithm. Phys. Rev. Appl. 21, 034036 (2024).
199.	 Chandarana, P., Hegade, N. N., Montalban, I., Solano, E. & Chen, X. Digitized counterdiabatic 
quantum algorithm for protein folding. Phys. Rev. Appl. 20, 014024 (2023).
200.	Lacroix, N. et al. Improving the performance of deep quantum optimization algorithms 
with continuous gate sets. PRX Quantum 1, 020304 (2020).
201.	 Bose, A., Doga, H., Utro, F. & Parida, L. Quantum-enabled multi-omics analysis. 
In Conference on Intelligent Systems for Molecular Biology (2024).
202.	Ghazi Vakili, M. et al. Quantum-computing-enhanced algorithm unveils potential KRAS 
inhibitors. Nat. Biotechnol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-024-02526-3 (2025).
203.	Larocca, M. et al. Barren plateaus in variational quantum computing. Nat. Rev. Phys. 7, 
174–189 (2025).
204.	Du, Y., Hsieh, M.-H., Liu, T. & Tao, D. Expressive power of parametrized quantum circuits. 
Phys. Rev. Res. 2, 033125 (2020).
205.	Arrazola, J. M., Delgado, A., Bardhan, B. R. & Lloyd, S. Quantum-inspired algorithms in 
practice. Quantum 4, 307 (2020).
206.	Tang, E. Dequantizing algorithms to understand quantum advantage in machine 
learning. Nat. Rev. Phys. 4, 692–693 (2022).
207.	 Chia, N.-H. et al. Sampling-based sublinear low-rank matrix arithmetic framework for 
dequantizing quantum machine learning. J. ACM 69, 33:1–33:72 (2022).
208.	Koch, T. et al. Quantum optimization benchmark library – the intractable decathlon. 
Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2504.03832 (2025).
209.	Amitay, Y. et al. CellSighter: a neural network to classify cells in highly multiplexed 
images. Nat. Commun. 14, 4302 (2023).
210.	 Angermueller, C., Lee, H. J., Reik, W. & Stegle, O. DeepCpG: accurate prediction of 
single-cell DNA methylation states using deep learning. Genome Biol. 18, 67 (2017).
211.	 Sidhom, J.-W., Larman, H. B., Pardoll, D. M. & Baras, A. S. DeepTCR is a deep learning 
framework for revealing sequence concepts within T-cell repertoires. Nat. Commun. 12, 
1605 (2021).
212.	 Yu, Z., Liu, F. & Li, Y. scTCA: a hybrid Transformer-CNN architecture for imputation and 
denoising of scDNA-seq data. Brief. Bioinform. https://doi.org/10.1093/bib/bbae577 (2024).
213.	 De Waele, G., Clauwaert, J., Menschaert, G. & Waegeman, W. CpG transformer for 
imputation of single-cell methylomes. Bioinformatics 38, 597–603 (2022).
214.	 Zhou, J. et al. Robust single-cell Hi-C clustering by convolution-and random-walk-based 
imputation. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 116, 14011–14018 (2019).
215.	 Jin, S. et al. Inference and analysis of cell–cell communication using CellChat. 
Nat. Commun. 12, 1088 (2021).
216.	 Cole, S., Eckstein, M., Friedland, S. & Życzkowski, K. On quantum optimal transport. 
Math. Phys. Anal. Geom. 26, 14 (2023).
217.	 Lange, M. et al. Mapping lineage-traced cells across time points with moslin. Genome 
Biol. 25, 277 (2024).
218.	 Forrow, A. & Schiebinger, G. LineageOT is a unified framework for lineage tracing and 
trajectory inference. Nat. Commun. 12, 4940 (2021).
219.	 Cang, Z. et al. Screening cell–cell communication in spatial transcriptomics via 
collective optimal transport. Nat. Methods 20, 218–228 (2023).
220.	Cao, K., Gong, Q., Hong, Y. & Wan, L. A unified computational framework for single-cell 
data integration with optimal transport. Nat. Commun. 13, 7419 (2022).
221.	 Verdon, G. et al. Quantum graph neural networks. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/
arXiv.1909.12264 (2019).
222.	 Biswas, B., Kumar, N., Sugimoto, M. & Hoque, M. A. scHD4E: Novel ensemble 
learning-based differential expression analysis method for single-cell RNA-sequencing 
data. Comput. Biol. Med. 178, 108769 (2024).
223.	 Mohammed, A. & Kora, R. A comprehensive review on ensemble deep learning: 
opportunities and challenges. J. King Saud. Univ. Comput. Inf. Sci. 35, 757–774 (2023).
224.	 Poggiali, A., Berti, A., Bernasconi, A., Del Corso, G. M. & Guidotti, R. Quantum clustering 
with k-Means: a hybrid approach. Theor. Comput. Sci. 992, 114466 (2024).
225.	 Roman-Vicharra, C. & Cai, J. J. Quantum gene regulatory networks. NPJ Quantum Inf. 9, 
1–8 (2023).
226.	 Loers, J. U. & Vermeirssen, V. A single-cell multimodal view on gene regulatory network 
inference from transcriptomics and chromatin accessibility data. Brief. Bioinform. 25, 
bbae382 (2024).
227.	 Krovi, H. Improved quantum algorithms for linear and nonlinear differential equations. 
Quantum 7, 913 (2023).
228.	 Aubin-Frankowski, P.-C. & Vert, J.-P. Gene regulation inference from single-cell RNA-seq 
data with linear differential equations and velocity inference. Bioinformatics 36, 
4774–4780 (2020).
229.	 Ghosh, A., Behl, H., Dupont, E., Torr, P. & Namboodiri, V. Steer: simple temporal 
regularization for neural ode. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 33, 14831–14843 (2020).
230.	Sha, Y., Qiu, Y., Zhou, P. & Nie, Q. Reconstructing growth and dynamic trajectories from 
single-cell transcriptomics data. Nat. Mach. Intell. 6, 25–39 (2024).
231.	 Song, T., Broadbent, C. & Kuang, R. GNTD: reconstructing spatial transcriptomes with 
graph-guided neural tensor decomposition informed by spatial and functional relations. 
Nat. Commun. 14, 8276 (2023).
232.	 Zinati, Y., Takiddeen, A. & Emad, A. GRouNdGAN: GRN-guided simulation of single-cell 
RNA-seq data using causal generative adversarial networks. Nat. Commun. 15, 4055 (2024).
233.	Huang, Z., Wang, J., Lu, X., Mohd Zain, A. & Yu, G. scGGAN: single-cell RNA-seq 
imputation by graph-based generative adversarial network. Brief. Bioinforma. 24, 
bbad040 (2023).
Author contributions
The authors contributed equally to all aspects of the article.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Peer review information Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology thanks the anonymous 
reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.
© Springer Nature Limited 2026, modified publication 2026
the Quantum for Healthcare Life Sciences Consortium
Saugata Basu2, Jannis Born3, Aritra Bose1, Sara Capponi4, Dimitra Chalkia5, Timothy A. Chan6,7, Hakan Doga8, 
Frederik F. Flöther9, Gad Getz10,11,12, Mark Goldsmith13, Tanvi Gujarati8, Aldo Guzman-Saenz1, Dimitrios Iliopoulos14, 
Gavin O. Jones8, Stefan Knecht13, Dhiraj Madan15, Sabrina Maniscalco13, Nicola Mariella16, Joseph A. Morrone1, 
Khadijeh Najafi17, Pushpak Pati18, Daniel Platt1, Maria Anna Rapsomaniki19, Anupama Ray20, Kahn Rhrissorrakrai1, 
Omar Shehab21, Ivano Tavernelli22, Meltem Tolunay8, Filippo Utro1, Stefan Woerner22, Sergiy Zhuk16, Jeannette M. Garcia8 
& Laxmi Parida1
2Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA. 3IBM Research, Zurich, Switzerland. 4IBM Research, San Jose, CA, USA. 5Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA. 6Center for Immunotherapy and Precision-Immuno-Oncology, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA. 7National Center for 
Regenerative Medicine, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA. 8IBM Quantum, San Jose, CA, USA. 9QuantumBasel, uptownBasel Infinity Corp., Arlesheim, 
Switzerland. 10Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA. 11Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer, Boston, MA, USA. 12Department 
of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 13Algorithmiq Ltd., Helsinki, Finland. 14Athos Therapeutics Inc, Los Angeles, CA, USA. 15IBM 
Research, Gurugram, India. 16IBM Quantum, Dublin, Ireland. 17Q-Ctrl, Cambridge, MA, USA. 18Johnson and Johnson, Zurich, Switzerland. 19University of 
Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland. 20IBM Quantum, Bengaluru, India. 21IBM Quantum, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA. 22IBM Quantum, Zurich, Switzerland. 
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this 
article under a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author 
self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the 
terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law.
