Source-PDF: D:\Review\New folder\Main\Core quantumbiomed + health relevance\How quantum computing can enhance biomarker discovery.pdf
Relative-Path: New folder\Main\Core quantumbiomed + health relevance\How quantum computing can enhance biomarker discovery.pdf
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Perspective
How quantum computing
can enhance biomarker discovery
Frederik F. Flo¨ ther,1,2,* Daniel Blankenberg,3 Maria Demidik,4,5 Karl Jansen,4,5 Raga Krishnakumar,6
Rajiv Krishnakumar,1,2 Nouamane Laanait,7 Laxmi Parida,8 Carl Y. Saab,3 and Filippo Utro8
1QuantumBasel, Schorenweg 44b, Arlesheim 4144, Switzerland
2Center for Quantum Computing and Quantum Coherence (QC2), University of Basel, Petersplatz 1, Basel 4001, Switzerland
3Cleveland Clinic, 9500 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA
4Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron DESY, Platanenallee 6, Zeuthen 15738, Germany
5Computation-Based Science and Technology Research Center, The Cyprus Institute, KavaﬁStreet 20, Nicosia 2121, Cyprus
6Sandia National Laboratories, 7011 East Avenue, Livermore, CA 94550, USA
7Elevance Health, 740 W Peachtree St. NW, Atlanta, GA 30308, USA
8IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, 1101 Kitchawan Road, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA
*Correspondence: frederik.ﬂoether@quantumbasel.com
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patter.2025.101236
SUMMARY
Biomarkers play a central role in medicine’s gradual progress toward proactive, personalized precision diag-
nostics and interventions. However, ﬁnding biomarkers that provide very early indicators of a change in
health status, for example, for multifactorial diseases, has been challenging. The discovery of such bio-
markers stands to beneﬁt signiﬁcantly from advanced information processing and means to detect complex
correlations, which quantum computing offers. In this perspective, quantum algorithms, particularly in ma-
chine learning, are mapped to key applications in biomarker discovery. The opportunities and challenges
associated with the algorithms and applications are discussed. The analysis is structured according to
different data types—multidimensional, time series, and erroneous data—and covers key data modalities
in healthcare—electronic health records, omics, and medical images. An outlook is provided concerning
open research challenges.
INTRODUCTION
A biomarker is a deﬁned characteristic that is measured as
an indicator of normal or pathological biological processes
or of response to an exposure or intervention.1 The study of
biomarkers arguably dates back to at least the beginning of
the 20th century, with Karl Landsteiner’s discovery of the
ABO blood types in 1901 (recognized with the 1930 Nobel Prize
in Physiology or Medicine). Biomarkers consist of both biolog-
ical molecules2 and other medical signs that indicate dis-
eases,3,4 in contrast to symptoms as well as more general
medical endpoints. Biomarkers can be based on histological,
molecular,
physiological,
and
radiographic
characteristics.
They may also take the form of aggregate high-dimensional
features.
Common modalities of biomarkers include biomolecules,
ﬁelds in electronic health records (EHRs), laboratory values,
medical images, omics information, social determinants, and
wearable data. Moreover, there are several application cate-
gories of biomarkers, including diagnostic, monitoring, prog-
nostic, predictive, response, safety, and susceptibility/risk.
Hence, biomarkers are context dependent and use case speciﬁc
in healthcare and clinical trial settings.
For example, clinical trials in neurology and psychiatry are
time-intensive, expensive, and subjective, and have lower suc-
cess rates than other indications.5 Within neuropsychiatry, pain
represents a large unmet need with respect to the lack of reliable
biomarkers. Hence, quantitative and physiological biomarkers
are urgently needed for a comprehensive and reliable diagnosis
and assessment of pain in healthcare and clinical trials.6 This is
THE BIGGER PICTURE
Precision medicine is a lofty goal, and challenges abound. A key ingredient to facil-
itate proactive interventions that keep an individual healthy is the detection of the earliest signals that the in-
dividual’s health status is changing. Identiﬁcation of such biomarkers requires advanced algorithms and an-
alytics. Enter quantum computing. While still an emerging technology, quantum algorithms, particularly
quantum machine learning, can uncover patterns that classical techniques cannot. This could enable the dis-
covery of novel biomarkers and thus accelerate progress toward precision medicine.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Patterns 6, June 13, 2025 ª 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc.
1
This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

illustrative of the impact that better biomarkers can have across
medicine.
While the beginnings of quantum mechanics date back 100
years, quantum computing is a new form of information process-
ing, including novel hardware and software, that leverages
quantum mechanical effects such as quantum entanglement,
interference, and superposition. It is the only known form of
computing that can provide, at least for certain problems, expo-
nential speedups compared with classical approaches; for other
problems, there may only be polynomial speedups or none at all,
however.7 Hundreds of use cases are meanwhile being explored
across industry and academia. Quantum computing is not just a
faster way of addressing problems; it also represents an entirely
different way to ﬁnd solutions. The beneﬁts also go beyond
speed; depending on the application and the use case, the
main beneﬁt could be accuracy,8 energy efﬁciency,9 or the ability
to handle difﬁcult datasets (for instance, high-dimensional or
highly noisy ones).10,11
The focus of this review is on (gate-based) quantum
computing and its potential for computational problems in
biomarker discovery. Nevertheless, it is important to note that
there are further quantum technologies with medical applica-
tions and biomarker relevance, in particular, quantum anneal-
ing12 and quantum sensing.13–15 Here, quantum computing
and relevant quantum algorithms are ﬁrst summarized in the sec-
tion ‘‘quantum computing’’ before the application of quantum al-
gorithms to biomarker discovery problems is described in the
section ‘‘quantum computing for biomarkers.’’ Open research
challenges are discussed in the section ‘‘open research chal-
lenges,’’ and conclusions are drawn in the section ‘‘conclusion.’’
QUANTUM COMPUTING
Quantum computing is a relatively nascent ﬁeld of research
undergoing rapid and substantial development. By leveraging
the fundamental properties of quantum mechanics, namely su-
perposition and entanglement, quantum computing presents
exciting opportunities to solve problems more efﬁciently than
classical computing can. However, the quantum computers
that are available currently are prone to errors and face limita-
tions in both the number of quantum bits (qubits) and the
connectivity between them. Overcoming these constraints is
essential to implementing and correctly executing any algorithm.
These constraints also introduce challenges in developing algo-
rithms to achieve a quantum advantage with available quantum
devices, commonly referred to as utility-scale or near-term
quantum computers. Therefore, signiﬁcant efforts concentrate
on utilizing near-term quantum computers, while research con-
tinues on developing fault-tolerant quantum hardware that can
operate reliably even in the presence of noise.
In quantum computing, algorithms take advantage of Hilbert
space. This is a high-dimensional vector space that represents
the state of the qubits and is naturally suited for computing
outcome probabilities (via an inner product). If the input of a quan-
tum algorithm is classical data that is not represented by quantum
states, then data embedding is required to perform operations on
a quantum computer. While there are various ways to embed clas-
sical data into quantum states, the number of available qubits re-
stricts the feature space size of the data we can tackle with near-
term devices. For instance, angle encoding16 or instantaneous
quantum polynomial encoding17 requires a linear scaling of the
number of qubits with respect to the number of features. Alterna-
tively, amplitude encoding provides a logarithmic scaling in the
number of qubits.16 However, without ancillary qubits, amplitude
encoding results in deep circuits.18 In practice, when the feature
space exceeds the capacity of available quantum hardware, clas-
sical dimensionality reduction algorithms are applied as a pre-pro-
cessing step in quantum pipelines. Still, with ongoing advance-
ments in quantum computing, biomarker discovery and other
quantum applications may eventually be performed without the
need for signiﬁcant (classical) pre-processing.
Quantum circuits are fundamental to the architecture of
quantum computation, providing the framework through which
quantum algorithms are designed and executed. At a high level,
a quantum circuit is a sequence of quantum gates applied to
qubits.Eachgateperformsaspeciﬁcoperation ononeormorequ-
bits. Fault-tolerant quantum algorithms typically require running
deep quantum circuits on tens of thousands to millions of qubits,
making them unsuitable for near-term devices. However, varia-
tional quantum algorithms (VQAs)19 utilize shallower circuits and
can produce meaningful results. This characteristic has made
VQAs highly popular for near-term quantum computing applica-
tions. VQAs are hybrid quantum-classical algorithms that involve
an iterative loop between quantum and classical hardware. First,
quantum circuits that have parametrized gates, called the ans€atze
or parametrized quantum circuits (PQCs), are employed to obtain
samples from a quantum computer. Second, a classical computer
optimizestheparametersofthequantum circuitwithrespecttothe
loss function of the problem. Most quantum machine learning
(QML) models belong to the class of VQAs and can be evaluated
on quantum computers. Alternatively, quantum computers could
be leveraged as sub-routines within classical algorithms. One
example is the thermal state preparation during Boltzmann ma-
chine training. However, the performance of VQAs is highly sensi-
tive to hardware noise, necessitating the use of error mitigation
techniques to partially counteract noise-induced errors.20
The execution of quantum circuits is performed on quantum
hardware through quantum processing units (QPUs), in analogy
to central and graphics processing units. Another element is the
quantum random access memory (QRAM), which is a quantum
memory that stores a quantum state for later retrieval. Unlike
QPUs, which are readily available via cloud computing platforms,
hardware incorporating QRAM devices has not yet been demon-
strated.
Quantum computing is naturally suited for quantum data (which
describes quantum states).However,it alsoholds great promise in
solving problems using classical data. In particular, there has been
muchprogressinthelastfew yearsinunderstandinghowquantum
computers can solve computational problems that can be formu-
lated as cryptography, ML, optimization, or simulation (of nature)
problems.21 In this paper, we focus on analyzing classical data
with the help of quantum algorithms, including multidimensional,
time series, and erroneous data, which is discussed in detail in
the section ‘‘quantum computing for biomarkers.’’
QML
QML integrates principles from quantum computing and ML,
promising potential advances in learning from data. A recent
ll
OPEN ACCESS
2
Patterns 6, June 13, 2025
Perspective

benchmarking study22 provides a comprehensive evaluation of
popular QML models on binary classiﬁcation problems. The
study examines QML architectures compatible with near-term
quantum devices such as quantum neural networks (QNNs),
including quantum convolutional neural networks and quantum
kernel methods (QKMs).
The majority of QNNs are based on PQCs. The parameters of
PQCs are optimized following the VQA paradigm. A typical QNN
begins with data embedding, followed by a series of gates. One
of the most general QNN models for classiﬁcation is the varia-
tional quantum classiﬁer (VQC), which is essentially a PQC.
Another example of a VQC is the circuit-centric quantum classi-
ﬁer,23 one of the earliest proposed generic QNNs. The data re-
uploading classiﬁer is a notable QNN architecture that was
shown to have universal approximation properties.24 The data
re-uploading classiﬁer features a processing layer composed
of data encoding and unitary operations with trainable parame-
ters. This layer is repeated a number of times, each layer having
independent parameters.
Recently, signiﬁcant attention has been given to leveraging
quantum computers for evaluating kernel functions in kernel
methods. Quantum kernels, based on feature maps (data encod-
ings), could be used with classical maximum margin classiﬁers.
To evaluate a quantum kernel function, a circuit is designed by
ﬁrst applying a feature map and then its Hermitian conjugate. A
prominent example of data-dependent quantum advantage in
QML models is demonstrated through QKMs. Huang et al.25 es-
tablished a relation between the potential advantage in predic-
tive accuracy of a model for a given dataset and a quantum
kernel. In addition, a projected quantum kernel classiﬁer was
introduced.
Although the predictive advantage of QML models for practi-
cally relevant problems remains an open question and necessi-
tates data embeddings that are difﬁcult to simulate classically,
quantum models are expected to show better generalization
than classical models, leveraging fewer data points.26 This is
particularly intriguing in ﬁelds where constructing sufﬁciently
large datasets to ensure satisfactory performance for ML models
is challenging, as is the case in many healthcare settings.
The ﬁndings by Bowles et al.22 highlight the signiﬁcance of
experimental design for the performance of quantum models.
Problem-agnostic implementations of QML models are unlikely
to outperform their classical counterparts, highlighting the
need for tailored approaches. Speciﬁcally, the embedding of
classical data into Hilbert space and subsequent operations
should be tailored to an application and available hardware.
Additionally, for QML models based on VQAs, the barren plateau
(BP) phenomenon should be addressed. A model experiences a
BP when its loss landscape ﬂattens, and the variance of param-
eters’ gradients decays exponentially as the system size in-
creases,
making
gradient-based
optimization
challenging.
Avoiding BPs in QML models commonly necessitates reducing
the expressivity of the circuits, which also tends to make them
more classically simulable (decreasing the potential of signiﬁcant
quantum advantages).27,28 These insights underscore the impor-
tance of use case-speciﬁc algorithm design for the potential
beneﬁts of quantum computing.
Despite the challenges in algorithm design, a variety of
(machine) learning tasks are being explored with quantum algo-
rithms. An overview of learning tasks, use case examples, and
corresponding quantum algorithms (many of the algorithms
may also be relevant to other learning tasks and use cases) is
given in Table 1 and is further discussed below.
Consider the example of dimensionality reduction, a key
technique used to compress large and complex datasets while
preserving key information. As quantum computing rapidly
develops, quantum algorithms for reducing the feature space
size are evolving alongside it. For instance, many classical
dimensionality reduction algorithms have a quantum adaptation,
such as quantum principal-component analysis (QPCA),29 quan-
tum linear discriminant analysis (QLDA),31 quantum slow feature
analysis (QSFA),32 and quantum isomap (QIsomap).33 A QPCA
speedup on quantum data is highlighted in the work of Gordon
et al.30 However, the majority of the quantum algorithms
for dimensionality reduction still require further algorithmic ad-
vancements and fault-tolerant hardware to achieve practical
relevance.
Many other
learning tasks
may beneﬁt
from quantum
computing.
This
includes
supervised
learning,
regression
analysis being one example, for instance via quantum linear
regression.36–39 Likewise, unsupervised learning may beneﬁt
from approaches such as quantum k-means (QK-means) clus-
tering40,41 and quantum spectral clustering.42 Given the recent
rise of generative artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) techniques, quantum
generative models are receiving renewed interest, including
QNNs,43
quantum
Boltzmann
machines
(QBMs),44,45
and
Table 1. Overview of machine learning and related tasks and examples of use cases and quantum algorithms
Learning task
Use cases
Quantum algorithms
Dimensionality reduction
covariates for biomarker trait regression
models
QPCA,29,30 QLDA,31 QSFA,32 QIsomap33
Classiﬁcation
early disease stage prediction
QNNs,23,24,34,35 QKMs17,25
Regression
disease risk prediction
quantum linear regression36–39
Clustering
multi-omics data analysis
QK-means,40,41 quantum spectral
clustering42
Generative learning
synthetic medical images
QNNs,43 QBMs,44,45 QGANs46
Time series forecasting
longitudinal patient studies, drug-
resistance mechanisms
QRC47
Natural language processing
clinical notes processing
QLSTM48
Optimization
treatment optimization
QAOA,49 QPSO,50 VQE51
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Patterns 6, June 13, 2025
3
Perspective

quantum generative adversarial networks (QGANs).46 As a ﬁnal
example, natural language processing is an emerging area that
has recently progressed through the emergence of quantum nat-
ural language processing (QNLP).48,52
QUANTUM COMPUTING FOR BIOMARKERS
Quantum computing is not a silver bullet; it does not enable im-
provements for every single computational task and thus not
every problem in biomarker research. Therefore, it is important
to categorize and narrow down which (important) problems in
biomarker research are particularly suited in regard to the appli-
cation of quantum algorithms. Related work has been conducted
for the biological sciences,53 cell-centric therapeutics,54 clinical
trials,55 digital health,56 and health and medicine.57
In this section, we organize areas of opportunity in applying
quantum computing to biomarker discovery along the lines of
data types while discussing multiple healthcare data modalities
for each data type. We chose this categorization instead of
one explicitly centered on healthcare data for the following
reasons. Quantum algorithm development advances at a fast
pace, and research in that ﬁeld often makes explicit assumptions
about data types as well as quantum computer accessibility. As
such, by focusing on connecting data types to healthcare modal-
ities, it is our hope that insights provided by this perspective
retain relevance in the face of future developments in quantum
algorithms. Moreover, this allows insights from the given
perspective to have stronger cross-disciplinary relevance. Spe-
ciﬁcally, in this paper, we organize around multidimensional
data, time series data, and erroneous data. For each of the above
data types, their occurrence in and relevance to different health-
care data modalities are analyzed in the context of the applica-
bility of quantum algorithms. Figure 1 illustrates the ﬂow of
data through a hybrid quantum-classical computational pipeline
for different types of data, healthcare data modalities, classical
approaches and limitations, and pertinent quantum algorithms
for selected use cases.
After preparing the data for downstream analysis, classical
dimensionality reduction techniques may be applied due to the
limited number of available qubits of near-term quantum de-
vices. These may differ between EHRs,58 omics data,59 and
medical images.
Clearly, the ﬂow illustrates that quantum computing algo-
rithms are only inserted at very speciﬁc points of the compu-
tational pipeline; most computational steps remain on clas-
sical systems. Optimizing the quantum part requires, for
example, adapting the algorithm to both the speciﬁcs of the
device and the characteristics of the data. The classical
data should be embedded into a Hilbert space via data en-
coding techniques.60 Depending on the nature of the data
and the speciﬁc problem at hand, it may be necessary to
develop data encoding methods tailored to the application.
Additionally, the quantum algorithm should account for the
quantum device’s connectivity and its limitation. For instance,
error
mitigation
and
suppression
protocols20
should
be
considered prior to running the algorithm to address potential
hardware-induced errors.
Multidimensional data
Recent technological developments have produced an abun-
dance of data in the domains of healthcare and life sciences.61
These are often correlated in intricate ways, which may
Figure 1. Flow of data through a hybrid quantum-classical computational pipeline for different types of data and different healthcare data
modalities
The top part of the ﬁgure focuses on the categories multidimensional, time series, and erroneous data. The bottom part covers the modalities EHRs, omics, and
medical images. Examples are given for pre-processing steps, quantum algorithms, classical algorithms and their limitations (in gray), and medical use case
applications.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
4
Patterns 6, June 13, 2025
Perspective

necessitate a (quantum) network model approach62 and ML
techniques such as (quantum) graph neural networks.35,63
Furthermore, multidimensionality of data can occur due to
different modalities and time changes for a set of samples and
features. Medical imaging, next-generation sequencing, and
other high-throughput instruments produce streams of multi-
modal data that are referred to as ‘‘big data.’’ In the context of
biomarker discovery, these massive data volumes acquire or-
ders of magnitude more quantity and complexity when utilized
in large-cohort analyses such as genome-wide association
studies (GWASs). A key problem, however, arises in the dimen-
sionality of the data. Even big data suffers from having too many
features compared with the number of samples, which signiﬁ-
cantly complicates data science.64 While there are solutions
for increasing the number of samples, these are often still limited
for biological datasets. Methods for dimensionality reduction
and feature selection therefore become extremely important in
handling big data so that the dimensionality can be returned to
where there are many more samples than features. This then
blurs the lines between big data and ‘‘small data,’’ which can
be very limited in either the number of samples or the number
of features. Small data with few samples is often encountered
in population studies of rare diseases and conditions. Even
though the underlying modality (e.g., whole-genome sequencing
data) is more aptly classiﬁed as big data, the intrinsically limited
number of samples (e.g., in the case of individuals diagnosed
with a rare condition) constrains a biomarker discovery investi-
gation to small data.
In all regimes of data (big, small, and the entire spectrum in be-
tween), quantum computing presents us with new opportunities
(and a new set of challenges) to address persistent limitations of
classical computational approaches. One notable example is
overcoming the data and scale inefﬁciencies of modern classical
ML. In the past decade, ML has made incredible advances pow-
ered by massively scaling training data, computing budgets, and
the sizes of deep neural networks. Recent theoretical results
have shown, however, that the efﬁcacy of deep neural networks
is tied to the number of samples accessible during the training
phase and the effective dimension of the dataset. To illustrate
this fundamental relationship, training current neural networks
to achieve a robust generalization error on a dataset roughly
the size and effective dimension of ImageNet would require a
model with around 10–100 billion parameters,65 rivaling the
size of some of the biggest large language models trained to
date. Empirical studies by various research groups have
conﬁrmed this unfavorable scaling of model size, data size,
and computing budget for other data modalities such as natural
language.66,67 Recent research in quantum computing points to
the possibility of a new class of quantum algorithms that are both
data and model size efﬁcient and able to generalize to new data
with few data samples.34
While there is evidence for more data-efﬁcient QML algo-
rithms, the loading of classical data into quantum computers
represents a new set of challenges that exists in both current
and near-term quantum hardware. How quantum computers
can access data is of central importance in the ﬁeld of QML. In
fact, some early QML algorithms made assumptions around ac-
cess to classical data that have been shown to lead to computa-
tional advantages over their classical counterparts. However,
once their data access assumptions were closely inspected
and loosened, it was found that many of those computational
speedups no longer hold.68 Going deeper into the topic of quan-
tum access to data is beyond the scope of this perspective; suf-
ﬁce it to say that for classical big data, data loading may erase
computational quantum advantages. Different research efforts
are under way, such as QRAMs69 on the hardware side and cor-
esets70,71 on the algorithmic side, to address this challenge. For
the time being, however, small data is a more natural ﬁt for exist-
ing and planned quantum computers.
EHRs
The increasing adoption of EHRs has revolutionized biomedical
research. EHRs provide rapid data availability, eliminating the
need for extensive recruitment or data collection. Additionally,
they support longitudinal tracking of patient health, facilitating
disease progression analysis. Their ability to capture data from
diverse patient populations also enhances the detection of sub-
tle health trends.
For the scope of this paper, EHRs are assumed to contain
(typically structured) information such as diagnoses, immuniza-
tion, laboratory measurements, medications, procedures, and
vital sign data as well as unstructured doctor notes. They also
increasingly integrate social determinants of health (SDOH)
and wearable data. Medical images and omics, due to the explo-
sive growth in their collection and relevance, are discussed
separately in this paper.
SDOH, encompassing economic stability, education, health-
care access, neighborhood environment, and social context,
signiﬁcantly impact health outcomes. While some SDOH data
(e.g., age, location) can be extracted from EHRs, other data
(e.g., social and behavioral determinants) is often missing. Since
SDOH are strongly correlated with morbidity and mortality, inte-
grating them with EHRs is crucial. However, the complex inter-
play between health and social factors presents signiﬁcant
analytical challenges.72
The application of deep learning, ML, and AI to EHRs has
yielded valuable medical insights, including accurate prediction
of
future
health
conditions.73,74
AI-based
approaches75,76
broaden the understanding of biomarkers, particularly when
EHRs are fused with other data sources.77 The construction of
such multimodal datasets may itself also beneﬁt from AI tech-
niques.78,79 Therefore, the increasing integration of EHRs in
biomedical research suggests that QML holds immense poten-
tial for advancing biomarker discovery. In particular, quantum
computing could enhance the analysis of EHRs in small-cohort
studies, such as clinical trials or rare disease research, by
improving predictive accuracy from small datasets.
Furthermore, QNLP shows promise in representing linguistic
information more effectively than classical methods.48,52 For
example, clinical notes may show that an epilepsy patient has
been seizure-free,76 which would otherwise likely have to be indi-
rectly inferred from the absence of medical codes. Therefore,
QNLP methods may be applied in analyzing free-text doctor’s
notes, which offer valuable insights.80
Omics
Handling sparse omics data is often a limitation for classic ML
and statistical techniques in biomarker discovery. Quantum
computing may actually provide a solution to some of these chal-
lenges.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Patterns 6, June 13, 2025
5
Perspective

Genomic, proteomic, and other omics data have revolution-
ized our understanding of complex diseases. Spurred by techno-
logical advances (including next-generation sequencing), omics
often includes high-throughput empirical studies, producing raw
data that necessitates multistep computational processing and
sophisticated analysis before being amenable to interpretation.
In the last decade, omics have become widely used in biomed-
ical research to study disease mechanisms, identiﬁcation of bio-
markers for therapeutic development, and diagnostics in the
clinical setting.81,82 Although such large datasets can now be
generated, biological data suffers from what is known as the
‘‘curse of dimensionality,’’83 which makes it challenging to
perform traditional ML, due to overﬁtting, and to properly train
the model. Mitigation of this is aided by state-of-the-art methods
in single-cell sequencing and spatial transcriptomics, which
begin to address the issue of dimensionality by interrogating in-
dividual cells rather than populations. While the number of pa-
tients will not increase with single-cell analysis, having informa-
tion from individual cells allows for more detailed biomarker
identiﬁcation strategies, especially in diseases with heteroge-
neous manifestations such as cancer. However, even with sin-
gle-cell analysis, limited data and too many features continue
to be problems, and addressing these problems requires tech-
niques such as dimensionality reduction, feature selection, and
clustering.84
An example is biomarker discovery for the stratiﬁcation of pa-
tients into different groups based on their susceptibility to a
particular disease or their response to a speciﬁc drug. Often,
such studies are limited in the number of available samples,
but owing to the large number of features, the search space
can be vast. Indeed, collecting omics data from patients is chal-
lenging for many reasons, most notably the invasive nature of the
medical procedures, their associated costs, and a lack of infra-
structure. This is an area where quantum computing has already
had demonstrable impact and will continue to be increasingly
impactful as data availability increases and the hardware and
software evolve.85,86
Furthermore, with genome sequencing becoming increasingly
democratized, methods such as GWAS and quantitative trait loci
(QTLs) mapping are often used to identify genetic biomarkers of
disease states or phenotypic variation in populations.81,87 How-
ever, for approaches such as GWAS and QTL mapping to reach
statistical signiﬁcance, let alone train predictive models, huge
amounts of complex data would be required, and this is where
quantum computing can provide potential alternatives to clas-
sical algorithms.88 In addition, GWAS studies often require
methods such as PCA to identify covariates for biomarker trait
regression models.89 In cases where the covariance matrix of in-
terest is of a low rank, QPCA29 and variants thereof30,90 can
prove far more efﬁcient than their existing classical counterparts,
albeit issues of data loading and quantum hardware fault toler-
ance must be overcome ﬁrst.
The interpretation of genetic variants in terms of biomarkers is
typically limited by inherent correlations between causal and
non-causal variants,91–93 requiring formal causal inference ap-
proaches. The latter are notorious for their prohibitive computa-
tional cost,94 except in cases with restrictive assumptions about
the underlying causal structure. Quantum causal inference is an
active area of research that could provide more powerful causal
discovery algorithms than are currently available classically. So
far, quantum speedups in causal inference have been obtained
only for datasets whose statistics cannot be described entirely
with classical means due to the presence of quantum corre-
lations.95
Another prevalent approach to biomarker discovery with
omics data is through studies of how the transcription of
one gene affects the transcription of its neighboring genes,
whether it be through statistical approaches such as expres-
sion QTLs or gaining predictive power from gene expression
patterns through ML.96,97 An efﬁcient way to rapidly under-
stand and analyze complex regulatory relationships between
genes is through
gene regulatory networks
(GRNs).98,99
GRNs are computationally efﬁcient since they only include
pairwise interactions. Recently, a PQC model for a quantum
single-cell GRN was proposed to try to allow for higher-order
correlations and preserving the computational efﬁciency of
GRNs.100 Authors have analyzed single-cell RNA sequencing
data from lymphoblastoid cell lines originating from two data
sources.101,102 Mixed results were found with the quantum
models, with some correlations in accordance with previous
ﬁndings, other correlations in contradiction to previous ﬁnd-
ings, and even new correlations that were not present in the
baseline model. This work is an example of how novel quan-
tum computational models and algorithms, even when co-de-
signed with omics problems, can lead to new insights and
help bypass the data-uploading challenges described earlier.
Moreover, an additional avenue to understand the co-expres-
sion of genes is to implement methods to cluster gene-expres-
sion datasets. While there are many techniques for clustering
gene expression data,103 more traditional methods often make
assumptions about the data or make a priori decisions about
parameters that are not necessarily sound.104 To circumvent
this, more complex algorithms such as genetic algorithms or
particle swarm optimizers (PSOs) have more recently been
explored for genomic clustering, with PSOs showing promising
results with respect to validated accuracies compared with
other methods.105 However, the disadvantage of this algorithm
is that it does not guarantee a convergence to a global mini-
mum106 and is prone to being trapped in local optima.107 Clas-
sical techniques to overcome this drawback have been discov-
ered,
but
their
implementation
can
be
computationally
expensive.108 A potential solution to mitigate this issue is to
use the quantum-behaved particle swarm optimization algo-
rithm106,109 and its modiﬁed versions.110–112 The idea is to sup-
pose that each point-particle is now a spinless one with quan-
tum
behavior
that
follows
a
corresponding
Schro¨ dinger
equation, which can then be used to perform the particles’ posi-
tion and velocity updates at each iteration. Although the refer-
ences cited have implemented these quantum-behaved PSO al-
gorithms on classical computers, to our current knowledge, they
have not been discussed in the context of being implemented on
a quantum computer. It appears possible that furthering the un-
derstanding of implementing quantum-behaved PSOs on quan-
tum computers, in addition to exploring other quantum optimi-
zation techniques (not necessarily focused on clustering) such
as the quantum approximate optimization algorithm (QAOA)
and the variational quantum eigensolver (VQE), could lead to
quantum advantages.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
6
Patterns 6, June 13, 2025
Perspective

Medical images
Medical images are a widely used approach for assessing injury,
disease, and health. By using techniques such as X-ray, mag-
netic resonance imaging (MRI), computed tomography (CT),
positron emission tomography (PET), and ultrasound, imaging
enables physicians and researchers to visualize internal struc-
tures and functions of the human body. Qualitative medical im-
aging involves the visual interpretation of images by trained
healthcare professionals to identify and characterize abnormal-
ities, lesions, or anatomical structures by focusing on subjective
observations such as size, shape, texture, and density to make
diagnostic assessments. This raises issues when it comes to de-
cision-making with images.
Even when looking for known features in medical images,
professionals can miss details or ﬁnd speciﬁc images that are
difﬁcult to interpret. While algorithms exist for dimensionality
reduction and feature selection of images, the amount and
diversity of data that need to be processed can often be a
computational challenge and lead to insights being missed.
This is where quantum computing could play a signiﬁcant role.
Quantum algorithms,113 particularly QML,114 have shown prom-
ise in this application space.
Consider the case where a radiologist may identify the presence
of a tumor in an MRI scan based on its appearance and contrast
with surrounding tissues. Quantitative medical imaging involves
the extraction of numerical or quantitative data from medical im-
ages using computer-based algorithms and software tools.
Here, subjective measurements of various parameters such as
blood ﬂow, density, metabolic activity, and volume are obtained,
which may allow for more precise and standardized assessments
of disease severity, progression, and treatment response. An
oncologist may use quantitative imaging techniques that can
measure tumor size, shape, and growth rate to assess treatment
efﬁcacy and predict patient outcomes. To be able to do this, sig-
niﬁcant computing power and advanced computational tech-
niques are needed; traditional approaches are often not sufﬁcient.
Another issue that arises is when speciﬁc features are not
known, and exploratory analysis is required for diagnosis, which
exacerbates the computing problem. For example, although
approximately 1.2% of the US population has active epilepsy,115
only half of these cases have a determined cause. In cases
where identiﬁcation is possible through known markers, MRI is
commonly used to detect structural brain abnormalities, such
as hippocampal sclerosis, cortical dysplasia, and brain tumors,
which may be the underlying cause of epilepsy. In cases where
structural abnormalities are not observed, PET can be used to
detect areas of hypometabolism that may correspond to epilep-
togenic zones (EZs). Single-photon emission CT can be used to
visualize blood ﬂow changes during a seizure and between sei-
zures, where the comparison of these images can aid in local-
izing the EZ. Hybrid imaging combines several different imaging
techniques, leveraging both structural and metabolic information
to improve localization. Extensive analysis is still required, how-
ever, to identify more markers that encompass a wider spectrum
of epilepsy patients and provide more granular detail into the
type and severity of the disease, which in turn requires massive
amounts of data collection and processing.
Reconstructing images from lower-dimensional and lower-res-
olution data is another area of potential quantum enhancement.116
For example, quantum techniques for volume-rendering medical
imaging data more efﬁciently have been proposed.117 The chal-
lenges in medical imaging go beyond image processing. Medical
imaging equipment often comprises devices that require special-
ized environments and maintenance. For instance, MRI machines
need high-powered magnets and must be kept at a temperature of
a few degrees kelvin. Lower-powered magnets that do not require
such extreme environments because they beneﬁt from quantum
algorithms that place lower demands on image resolution would
be a boon for accessibility and equity.
Time series data
The models used in predicting future values of a time series given
a set of past values are fundamentally different from predicting
labels or a quantity given a set of features. This is because the
former is an extrapolation whereas (in most cases) the latter is
an interpolation. Thus, common models (ML or otherwise) used
in classiﬁcation or regression problems usually do not perform
well for time series prediction and forecasting, and time series
data require other approaches.
For many biomedical applications, analysis of time series data,
also known as longitudinal data, presents a range of challenges
for classical techniques, including ML models. Some of these
challenges are algorithm selection, explainability, heteroge-
neous data, inconsistent labeling and annotations, missing
data, and unbalanced data.118 In addition, the many correlated
variables typically found in biomarker data make it difﬁcult to
elucidate causal pathways.119 Quantum computing techniques,
particularly
QML
algorithms
such
as
quantum
reservoir
methods,120 are actively researched to achieve enhanced time
series processing.121
There already exists a variety of techniques to tackle time
series problems. For many examples, one can often obtain
reasonable predictions by using relatively simple models such
as autoregressive moving average models and their many vari-
ants.122 For time series data with additional challenges, such
as the ones mentioned at the start of this section, the current
state-of-the-art is arguably the long short-term memory (LSTM)
ML model,123 which is able to capture some properties, such
as seasonality and highly correlated variables, much better
than the more traditional models. However, a recent QML tech-
nique that has also started to gain attention is quantum reservoir
computing (QRC).124 Reservoir computing is a predecessor to
recurrent neural networks (RNNs), where the hidden weights
can be treated as a reservoir that projects the data into a
higher-dimensional subspace, which can then be fed into a sim-
ple linear model; quantum analogs exist.125 The reservoir (similar
to the RNN) receives the time series data sequentially, and hence
the dynamics of the reservoir are dependent on the previous time
step. This reservoir can have many different forms, ranging from
classical architectures like the echo state network126 to physical
implementations.127,128 The advantage of reservoir computing
versus RNNs is that since the majority of the randomly initialized
parameters of this reservoir is ﬁxed from the start, the computa-
tional cost of training them is much lower. However, this random-
ness typically requires reservoirs to have many more parameters
to achieve comparable accuracy. Still, the use of a quantum
reservoir (e.g., by generating a random quantum circuit) can
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Patterns 6, June 13, 2025
7
Perspective

decrease the number of parameters required for the model to
perform well.
EHRs
Time series analysis is particularly relevant to EHRs, given the lon-
gitudinal nature of many of the components (e.g., laboratory
values). To move closer to proactive medicine, one needs to be
able to accurately predict the next points in a time series to
achieve early diagnostics and interventions. EHRs suffer from
many of the data challenges described earlier. For instance,
many of the patients go in and out of healthcare systems, and
as a result, approaches such as hidden Markov models (HMMs)
are applied.129 Although these models are good candidates to
handle noisy and highly variable signals, they tend to fall short
for several reasons, including the high memory requirements to
implement these models at scale and attempts to take into ac-
count all the important variables. Using QRC or even a quantum
version of HMMs could relieve this bottleneck around high-mem-
ory requirements if the data can be encoded in an efﬁcient way.
Furthermore, wearables represent another modality that is
growing rapidly and starting to be integrated with EHRs.130
These include chemical sensors that collect signals with electro-
chemical and optical methods,131 as well as ﬁtness trackers and
other devices that monitor digital biomarkers.132 They may also
include quantum sensors that exploit quantum mechanical
properties to achieve superior sensitivities, such as nitrogen-va-
cancy-center-based magnetometry at the level of single neu-
rons.133 By their nature, these wearables typically generate
time series data and could thus beneﬁt from such quantum
(ML) methods.
Omics
Omics time series data are particularly valuable for biomarker
discovery, as they allow the observation of temporal patterns
and gene-gene/protein-protein interactions. Examples includes
disease progression/sub-typing134,135 and patient response to
treatments.136–139
Non-invasive approaches to use liquid biopsies allow one to
capture a mixture of the omics proﬁle of cancer cells in a patient
via cell-free DNA (cfDNA). Recently, studies have demonstrated
the application of cfDNA to identify drug resistance mecha-
nisms.140 Moreover, in the last few years several studies have
shown that cfDNA fragmentomics’ characteristics differ in
normal and diseased individuals without the need to distinguish
the source of the cfDNA fragments, which makes it a promising
novel biomarker in particular for early cancer detection.141,142
Indeed, ML algorithms have been applied to such tasks with
promising results to identify late-stage cancer141 but still fail to
detect early signs in the development of the disease. Another
recent application of omics time series is in the case of epilepsy
post-surgical seizure recurrence,134 where omics data were
used to subtype patients based on their treatment responses.
In general, classical ML often cannot be easily applied to
omics-based time series data due to issues such as small sam-
ple numbers or missing data. Therefore, data imputation is
required, and current imputation techniques often do not incor-
porate time dependence, thereby leaving out critical information
during imputation. Recent work has demonstrated that graph
networks that model topology across samples can be hugely
beneﬁcial in such cases.143 An example is the use of dynamic
Bayesian networks for analysis of time series microbiome
data,144 which has been demonstrated to be a critical biomarker
for many disease states.145,146 Still, these topological methods
quickly become computationally infeasible with increasingly
high-dimensional and complicated datasets, which is where
QML and quantum topological data analysis (QTDA)147 ap-
proaches may be able to help, providing an orthogonal point of
view and insights. Indeed, they could be used to differentiate
with high accuracy between healthy individuals and cancer pa-
tients in early stages of the disease, leading to more targeted
and effective treatments.
Medical images
Medical image time series data occur across a continuum of mo-
dalities, ranging from a set of snapshots separated in time to
movie-likevideos. Acquiring image timeseriesdatafor biomarkers
involvescapturing medical images overtime tomonitor changes in
biological or physiological states. Examples of time-lapse series
include (1) MRI or CT scans taken over weeks or months, showing
the size and shape of a tumor changing in response to treatment
andactingasabiomarkerforcancertherapyefﬁcacy;(2)retinalim-
aging that tracks the progression of diabetic retinopathy via blood
vessel leakage, aneurysms, and hemorrhages; and (3) PET scans
of the brain, showing changes in glucose metabolism or amyloid
plaque accumulation for neurodegenerative diseases such as Alz-
heimer disease. Examples ofmovie-like imaging data include four-
dimensional ultrasoundscans (thefourth dimension being time) for
fetal development and function and functional MRI to observe
changes in brain activity in response to stimuli.
QRC techniques are relevant techniques for application to
these problems. However, the quantum computers would have
to be larger than the current generations or the initial image
data would have to be downscaled with classical pre-processing
techniques, such as passing the image through a residual
network148 before sending it through the QRC model. Further
investigation is required to understand whether the loss of infor-
mation during the classical pre-processing would negate the po-
tential advantages of using QRC and related quantum methods
instead of classical techniques.
Erroneous data
Noise and errors often appear in the context of quantum
computing due to the fragility of the quantum systems and their
inherent tendency to decohere. A variety of approaches is being
researched to handle or even leverage such noise10,149–152 and
progress toward quantum error correction,153 arguably the
holy grail of quantum computing. The focus of this discussion,
however, is on handling noisy datasets where the labels are
incorrect or missing, which represents a major challenge for
classical algorithms.154–156 Such misannotations are also of
concern when data are synthetically generated,157 an area that
is also being explored with QGANs and related methods.158
EHRs
EHR data have been notoriously difﬁcult to analyze due to fac-
tors such as errors, lack of interoperability, record gaps, and un-
usually large or small data sizes. While leveraging such data may
also allow better generalization behavior through classical
models,73 QML has shown promise in dealing with such difﬁcult
datasets even more effectively. For example, the usual presence
of quantum noise may actually lead to a greater degree of global
robustness and thus fairer models.159 Moreover, quantum
ll
OPEN ACCESS
8
Patterns 6, June 13, 2025
Perspective

transfer learning may be beneﬁcial when the (real-world) dataset
of interest is particularly low or high dimensional.160 Quantum
support vector machines have been applied to EHRs and
have, for small datasets, been shown to be competitive with
classical approaches in classifying ischemic heart disease161
and predicting the persistence of rheumatoid arthritis pa-
tients.162 Small datasets, for instance, for rare-disease or other
very restricted cohorts, may in fact lead to some of the earliest
quantum advantages, given that quantum generative and other
QML models are particularly suitable for such a setting.26,163
Finally, the process of imputation itself may be enhanced,
leveraging quantum determinantal point processes.164
Omics
Erroneous omics data, often caused by sequencing errors,
incomplete data, or misinterpretations, can signiﬁcantly hinder
accurate analysis. These inaccuracies can lead to misdiagnosis,
ineffective treatments and loss of trust in omics data. Quantum
algorithms can enhance pattern matching/discovery and error
correction in omics sequences, making it possible to identify
and correct errors.88 A possible approach could be the use of
QTDA, which helps characterize the shape and structure of the
data in a high-dimensional space (involving Betti number and
harmonic representations), making it more effective than tradi-
tional methods in regard to identifying and correcting errors in
complex omics data. Such techniques not only enhance the
quality of the omics data but also accelerate the discovery of bio-
markers.
Medical images
Erroneous data in medical imaging can lead to misdiagnoses,
poor treatment outcomes, and overall inefﬁciencies in health-
care. Examples include noise, artifacts, and image reconstruc-
tion issues. Medical images can often display distortions caused
by equipment limitations, environmental factors, and patient
movements.
Quantum algorithms that have been designed for noise reduc-
tion and denoising165,166 may be able to more efﬁciently and
effectively process noisy imaging data and distinguish between
Figure 2. Overview of open research
challenges in the application of quantum
computing in biomarker discovery,
validation, and adoption
meaningful information and noise. Due
to the large amount of data generated
by
medical
image
technology,
the
compression, storage, and reconstruc-
tion of such data remain signiﬁcant chal-
lenges. In many cases, raw imaging data
(such as k-space data from MRI) are
deleted shortly after acquisition. Quan-
tum-assisted data compression, coupled
with QML approaches, may be able to
more effectively compress large medical
images without losing critical informa-
tion.167,168 Finally, as image reconstruc-
tion is a complex task that is further
complicated by erroneous data, recon-
struction algorithms must be sufﬁciently
robust to be able to handle noise and mistakes.169 Quantum al-
gorithms and QML techniques may be more effective at detect-
ing patterns in medical images, leading to increased capabilities
in indicating and resolving such erroneous imaging data.
OPEN RESEARCH CHALLENGES
Quantum computers are swiftly moving from lab to industry. A
broad range of improvements are nevertheless still necessary
on the road to commercialization and widespread usage. Many
of the open problems are cross-industry; better quantum hard-
ware, algorithms, and software will enable more and more use
cases. In this section, some of the challenges that are particularly
relevant to biomarker discovery, validation, and adoption are
outlined; an overview is provided in Figure 2.
In the space of biomarker discovery, the loading of data is one
key challenge. As described before, biomarker discovery often
necessitates extracting insights from large classical datasets.
Despite progress with QRAMs, breakthroughs in this area will
unlock many more applications. Related to that, quantum algo-
rithms remain an intensely researched area. New ones are being
continually discovered; for instance, a study recently claimed an
exponential advantage in pathﬁnding for graphs.170 Further-
more, quantum federated learning represents another novel
algorithmic area.171–174 The idea is to enhance federated
learning models where different entities train a model while keep-
ing their data decentralized. Given the growing importance
federated learning has for healthcare and medicine, from allow-
ing
multi-institutional
collaborations
without
patient
data
sharing175 to enabling digital health176 to enhancing the internet
of medical things,177 this is a clear innovation opportunity.
In the area of biomarker validation, a critical aspect concerns
benchmarks. The challenge with demonstrating value from quan-
tum computing is that the (classical) goal posts are often not
clearly deﬁned and may shift (particularly in response to, or
even inspired by, quantum algorithm advances). This makes it
challenging to justify the efforts required to develop and use
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Patterns 6, June 13, 2025
9
Perspective

quantum algorithm-based tools. Connected with that, general-
ization is a key issue due to individual biomarker variability result-
ing from genetic and lifestyle factors.178 As aresult, more granular
(quantum) models will have to be developed, which might again
require more (classical) data and novel quantum algorithms.
Finally, data security represents one essential area in regard to
biomarker adoption. The high sensitivity of much medical data
requires strict data processing standards and is not yet compat-
ible with many quantum computing architectures that demand
cloud transfer of data across the world. Similarly, clinical adop-
tion requires a signiﬁcant amount of trust to be built, which in
turn necessitates explainable models and easily replicable re-
sults. This challenge, which is also closely linked to similar prob-
lems with AI adoption, is exacerbated due to the abstract and
inherently probabilistic nature of quantum computing.
CONCLUSION
In the long term, the hope is that discovery of better biomarkers
helps pave the way toward proactive precision medicine. As
opposed to lengthy reactive treatments, each individual may
have a continually updated health status that is based on
personalized biomarkers and indicates whenever interventions
of any form could be advisable. To make this possible, bio-
markers must not only be accurately connected with such a
health status but must also be accessible in a cost-efﬁcient
and easy manner. This is very challenging for diseases, including
multifactorial ones such as Alzheimer disease and cancer, and
rare conditions for which little data exist. These are areas where
quantum computing applications are particularly promising.
Clearly, there are also still discrepancies with respect to ac-
cess to advanced forms of computing, such as quantum
computing, across the world. While quantum computing in
particular has been rapidly made more widely available, it is likely
to remain relatively expensive for some time to come; today,
typical costs are thousands of US dollars per QPU hour. Thus,
democratization of such transformative technologies is an
important issue that also needs to be considered to realize their
full impact across the world.179
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
QuantumBasel, part of the uptownBasel innovation campus, is a
center of competence for quantum computing and AI. The Univer-
sity of Basel is Switzerland’s oldest university. Cleveland Clinic is
an American nonproﬁt multispecialty academic medical center.
DESY is a national accelerator and research center in Germany.
The Cyprus Institute is a nonproﬁt research and educational insti-
tution with a strong scientiﬁc and technological orientation. Sandia
National Laboratories is a multimission laboratory managed and
operated for the US Department of Energy’s National Nuclear Se-
curity Administration. Elevance Health is an American health insur-
ance provider. IBM is an American technology company.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Sandia National Laboratories is a multimission laboratory managed and oper-
ated by National Technology & Engineering Solutions of Sandia, LLC, a wholly
owned subsidiary of Honeywell International Inc., for the US Department of En-
ergy’s National Nuclear Security Administration under contract DE-NA0003525.
This paper describes objective technical results and analysis. Any subjective
views or opinions that might be expressed in the paper do not necessarily repre-
sent the views of the US Department of Energy or the US government.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
REFERENCES
1. Biomarkers Deﬁnitions Working Group (2001). Biomarkers and surrogate
endpoints: preferred deﬁnitions and conceptual framework. Clin. Phar-
macol. Ther. 69, 89–95.
2. Henry, N.L., and Hayes, D.F. (2012). Cancer biomarkers. Mol. Oncol. 6,
140–146.
3. Strimbu, K., and Tavel, J.A. (2010). What are biomarkers? Curr. Opin. HIV
AIDS 5, 463–466.
4. Aronson, J.K., and Ferner, R.E. (2017). Biomarkers—a general review.
Curr. Protoc. Pharmacol. 76, 9–23.
5. Thomas, D.W., Burns, J., Audette, J., Carroll, A., Dow-Hygelund, C., and Hay,
M. (2016). Clinical development success rates 2006–2015. https://go.bio.org/
rs/490-EHZ-999/images/Clinical%20Development%20Success%20Rates
%202006-2015%20-%20BIO%2C%20Biomedtracker%2C%20Amplion%
202016.pdf.
6. Davis, K.D., Aghaeepour, N., Ahn, A.H., Angst, M.S., Borsook, D., Bren-
ton, A., Burczynski, M.E., Crean, C., Edwards, R., Gaudilliere, B., et al.
(2020). Discovery and validation of biomarkers to aid the development
of safe and effective pain therapeutics: challenges and opportunities.
Nat. Rev. Neurol. 16, 381–400.
7. M. Horowitz and E. Grumbling, eds. (2019). Quantum Computing: Prog-
ress and Prospects (The National Academies Press).
8. Peral-Garcı´a, D., Cruz-Benito, J., and Garcı´a-Pen˜ alvo, F.J. (2024). Sys-
tematic literature review: Quantum machine learning and its applications.
Computer Science Review 51, 100619.
9. Jaschke, D., and Montangero, S. (2023). Is quantum computing green?
An estimate for an energy-efﬁciency quantum advantage. Quantum
Sci. Technol. 8, 025001.
10. Peters, E., Caldeira, J., Ho, A., Leichenauer, S., Mohseni, M., Neven, H.,
Spentzouris, P., Strain, D., and Perdue, G.N. (2021). Machine learning of
high dimensional data on a noisy quantum processor. npj Quantum Inf.
7, 161.
11. Marshall, S.C., Gyurik, C., and Dunjko, V. (2023). High dimensional quan-
tum machine learning with small quantum computers. Quantum 7, 1078.
12. Feleﬂy, T., Roukoz, C., Fares, G., Achkar, S., Yazbeck, S., Meyer, P., Kor-
dahi, M., Azoury, F., Nasr, D.N., Nasr, E., et al. (2023). An explainable
MRI-radiomic quantum neural network to differentiate between large
brain metastases and high-grade glioma using quantum annealing for
feature selection. J. Digit. Imag. 36, 2335–2346.
13. Mauranyapin, N.P., Terrasson, A., and Bowen, W.P. (2022). Quantum
biotechnology. Adv. Quantum Technol. 5, 2100139.
14. Flo¨ ther, F.F., and Grifﬁn, P.F. (2023). How can quantum technologies be
applied in healthcare, medicine and the life sciences? Res. dir. Quantum
technol. 1, e7.
15. Shams, M., Choudhari, J., Reyes, K., Prentzas, S., Gapizov, A., Shehryar,
A., Affaf, M., Grezenko, H., Gasim, R.W., Mohsin, S.N., et al. (2023). The
Quantum-Medical Nexus: Understanding the Impact of Quantum Tech-
nologies on Healthcare. Cureus 15, e48077.
16. Schuld, M., and Petruccione, F. (2018). Supervised Learning with Quan-
tum Computers (Springer Cham).
17. Havlı´cek, V., Co´ rcoles, A.D., Temme, K., Harrow, A.W., Kandala, A.,
Chow, J.M., and Gambetta, J.M. (2019). Supervised learning with quan-
tum-enhanced feature spaces. Nature 567, 209–212. https://doi.org/10.
1038/s41586-019-0980-2.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
10
Patterns 6, June 13, 2025
Perspective

18. Nakaji, K., Uno, S., Suzuki, Y., Raymond, R., Onodera, T., Tanaka, T., Te-
zuka, H., Mitsuda, N., and Yamamoto, N. (2022). Approximate amplitude
encoding in shallow parameterized quantum circuits and its application
to ﬁnancial market indicators. Phys. Rev. Res. 4, 023136. https://doi.
org/10.1103/PhysRevResearch.4.023136.
19. Cerezo, M., Arrasmith, A., Babbush, R., Benjamin, S.C., Endo, S., Fujii,
K., McClean, J.R., Mitarai, K., Yuan, X., Cincio, L., and Coles, P.J.
(2021). Variational quantum algorithms. Nat. Rev. Phys. 3, 625–644.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42254-021-00348-9.
20. Cai, Z., Babbush, R., Benjamin, S.C., Endo, S., Huggins, W.J., Li, Y.,
McClean, J.R., and O’Brien, T.E. (2023). Quantum error mitigation.
Rev. Mod. Phys. 95, 045005. https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.95.
045005.
21. Bayerstadler, A., Becquin, G., Binder, J., Botter, T., Ehm, H., Ehmer, T.,
Erdmann, M., Gaus, N., Harbach, P., Hess, M., et al. (2021). Industry
quantum computing applications. EPJ Quantum Technol. 8, 25. https://
doi.org/10.1140/epjqt/s40507-021-00114-x.
22. Bowles, J., Ahmed, S., and Schuld, M. (2024). Better than classical? The
subtle art of benchmarking quantum machine learning models. Preprint
at arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2403.07059.
23. Schuld, M., Bocharov, A., Svore, K.M., and Wiebe, N. (2020). Circuit-
centric quantum classiﬁers. Phys. Rev. A 101, 032308. https://doi.org/
10.1103/PhysRevA.101.032308.
24. Pe´ rez-Salinas, A., Cervera-Lierta, A., Gil-Fuster, E., and Latorre, J.I.
(2020). Data re-uploading for a universal quantum classiﬁer. Quantum
4, 226. https://doi.org/10.22331/q-2020-02-06-226.
25. Huang, H.Y., Broughton, M., Mohseni, M., Babbush, R., Boixo, S., Ne-
ven, H., and McClean, J.R. (2021). Power of data in quantum machine
learning. Nat. Commun. 12, 2631. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-
22539-9.
26. Caro, M.C., Huang, H.Y., Cerezo, M., Sharma, K., Sornborger, A., Cincio,
L., and Coles, P.J. (2022). Generalization in quantum machine learning
from few training data. Nat. Commun. 13, 4919.
27. Cerezo, M., Larocca, M., Garcı´a-Martı´n, D., Diaz, N.L., Braccia, P., Fon-
tana, E., Rudolph, M.S., Bermejo, P., Ijaz, A., Thanaslip, S., et al. (2023).
Does provable absence of barren plateaus imply classical simulability?
or, why we need to rethink variational quantum computing. Preprint at ar-
Xiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2312.09121.
28. Larocca, M., Thanasilp, S., Wang, S., Sharma, K., Biamonte, J., Coles,
P.J., Cincio, L., McClean, J.R., Holmes, Z., and Cerezo, M. (2024). A re-
view of barren plateaus in variational quantum computing. Preprint at ar-
Xiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2405.00781.
29. Lloyd, S., Mohseni, M., and Rebentrost, P. (2014). Quantum principal
component analysis. Nat. Phys. 10, 631–633. https://doi.org/10.1038/
nphys3029.
30. Gordon, M.H., Cerezo, M., Cincio, L., and Coles, P.J. (2022). Covariance
Matrix Preparation for Quantum Principal Component Analysis. PRX
Quantum 3, 030334. https://doi.org/10.1103/PRXQuantum.3.030334.
31. Yu, K., Lin, S., and Guo, G.D. (2023). Quantum dimensionality reduction
by linear discriminant analysis. Phys. Stat. Mech. Appl. 614, 128554.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physa.2023.128554.
32. Kerenidis, I., and Luongo, A. (2020). Classiﬁcation of the MNIST data set
with quantum slow feature analysis. Phys. Rev. A 101, 062327. https://
doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.101.062327.
33. Feng, W., Guo, G., Lin, S., and Xu, Y. (2024). Quantum Isomap algorithm
for manifold learning. Phys. Rev. Appl. 22, 014049. https://doi.org/10.
1103/PhysRevApplied.22.014049.
34. Cong, I., Choi, S., and Lukin, M.D. (2019). Quantum convolutional neural
networks. Nat. Phys. 15, 1273–1278.
35. Ray, A., Madan, D., Patil, S., Pati, P., Rapsomaniki, M., Kohlakala, A.,
Dlamini, T.R., Muller, S.J., Rhrissorrakrai, K., Utro, F., and Parida, L.
(2024). Hybrid quantum-classical graph neural networks for tumor clas-
siﬁcation in digital pathology. In 2024 IEEE International Conference on
Quantum Computing and Engineering (QCE), 1 (IEEE), pp. 1611–1616.
36. Wiebe, N., Braun, D., and Lloyd, S. (2012). Quantum Algorithm for Data
Fitting. Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 050505. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev-
Lett.109.050505.
37. Wang, G. (2017). Quantum algorithm for linear regression. Phys. Rev. A
96, 012335. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.96.012335.
38. Zhao, Z., Fitzsimons, J.K., and Fitzsimons, J.F. (2019). Quantum-assis-
ted Gaussian process regression. Phys. Rev. A 99, 052331. https://doi.
org/10.1103/PhysRevA.99.052331.
39. Date, P., and Potok, T. (2021). Adiabatic quantum linear regression. Sci.
Rep. 11, 21905. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-01445-6.
40. Khan, S.U., Awan, A.J., and Vall-Llosera, G. (2019). K-means clustering
on noisy intermediate scale quantum computers. Preprint at arXiv.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1909.12183.
41. Arthur, D., and Date, P. (2021). Balanced k-means clustering on an adia-
batic quantum computer. Quant. Inf. Process. 20, 294. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s11128-021-03240-8.
42. Kerenidis, I., and Landman, J. (2021). Quantum spectral clustering. Phys.
Rev. A 103, 042415. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.103.042415.
43. Tian, J., Sun, X., Du, Y., Zhao, S., Liu, Q., Zhang, K., Yi, W., Huang, W.,
Wang, C., Wu, X., et al. (2023). Recent advances for quantum neural net-
works in generative learning. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 45,
12321–12340.
44. Amin, M.H., Andriyash, E., Rolfe, J., Kulchytskyy, B., and Melko, R.
(2018). Quantum Boltzmann Machine. Phys. Rev. X 8, 021050. https://
doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevX.8.021050.
45. T€uys€uz, C., Demidik, M., Coopmans, L., Rinaldi, E., Croft, V., Haddad, Y.,
Rosenkranz, M., and Jansen, K. (2024). Learning to generate high-
dimensional distributions with low-dimensional quantum Boltzmann ma-
chines. Preprint at arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2410.16363.
46. Baglio, J. (2024). Data augmentation experiments with style-based quan-
tum generative adversarial networks on trapped-ion and superconduct-
ing-qubit technologies. Preprint at arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.
2405.04401.
47. Suzuki, Y., Gao, Q., Pradel, K.C., Yasuoka, K., and Yamamoto, N. (2022).
Natural quantum reservoir computing for temporal information process-
ing. Sci. Rep. 12, 1353.
48. Di Sipio, R., Huang, J.H., Chen, S.Y.C., Mangini, S., and Worring, M.
(2022). The dawn of quantum natural language processing. In ICASSP
2022-2022 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
Signal Processing (ICASSP) (IEEE), pp. 8612–8616.
49. Choi, J., and Kim, J. (2019). A tutorial on quantum approximate optimiza-
tion algorithm (QAOA): Fundamentals and applications. In 2019 interna-
tional conference on information and communication technology conver-
gence (ICTC) (IEEE), pp. 138–142.
50. Flori, A., Oulhadj, H., and Siarry, P. (2022). QUAntum Particle Swarm
Optimization: An auto-adaptive PSO for local and global optimization.
Comput. Optim. Appl. 82, 525–559.
51. Tilly, J., Chen, H., Cao, S., Picozzi, D., Setia, K., Li, Y., Grant, E., Wossnig,
L., Rungger, I., Booth, G.H., and Tennyson, J. (2022). The variational
quantum eigensolver: a review of methods and best practices. Phys.
Rep. 986, 1–128.
52. Guarasci, R., De Pietro, G., and Esposito, M. (2022). Quantum natural
language processing: Challenges and opportunities. Appl. Sci. 12, 5651.
53. Emani, P.S., Warrell, J., Anticevic, A., Bekiranov, S., Gandal, M., McCon-
nell, M.J., Sapiro, G., Aspuru-Guzik, A., Baker, J.T., Bastiani, M., et al.
(2021). Quantum computing at the frontiers of biological sciences. Nat.
Methods 18, 701–709.
54. Basu, S., Born, J., Bose, A., Capponi, S., Chalkia, D., Chan, T.A., Doga,
H., Flother, F.F., Getz, G., Goldsmith, M., et al. (2023). Towards quantum-
enabled cell-centric therapeutics. Preprint at arXiv. https://doi.org/10.
48550/arXiv.2307.05734.
55. Doga, H., Bose, A., Sahin, M.E., Bettencourt-Silva, J., Pham, A., and Kim,
E. (2024). How can quantum computing be applied in clinical trial design
and optimization? Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 45, 880–891.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Patterns 6, June 13, 2025
11
Perspective

56. Gupta, R.S., Wood, C.E., Engstrom, T., Pole, J.D., and Shrapnel, S.
(2024). Quantum Machine Learning for Digital Health? A Systematic Re-
view. Preprint at arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2410.02446.
57. Flo¨ ther, F.F. (2023). The state of quantum computing applications in
health and medicine. Research Directions: Quantum Technologies 1,
e10. https://doi.org/10.1017/qut.2023.4.
58. Sorkhabi, L.B., Gharehchopogh, F.S., and Shahamfar, J. (2020). A sys-
tematic approach for pre-processing electronic health records for min-
ing: Case study of heart disease. Int. J. Data Min. Bioinf. 24, 97–120.
59. Torres-Martos, A´ ., Bustos-Aibar, M., Ramı´rez-Mena, A., Ca´ mara-Sa´ n-
chez, S., Anguita-Ruiz, A., Alcala´ , R., Aguilera, C.M., and Alcala´ -Fdez,
J. (2023). Omics data preprocessing for machine learning: A case study
in childhood obesity. Genesis 14, 248.
60. Schuld, M., and Killoran, N. (2019). Quantum machine learning in feature
hilbert spaces. Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 040504.
61. Shilo, S., Rossman, H., and Segal, E. (2020). Axes of a revolution: chal-
lenges and promises of big data in healthcare. Nat. Med. 26, 29–38.
62. Maniscalco, S., Borrelli, E.M., Cavalcanti, D., Foti, C., Glos, A., Gold-
smith, M., Knecht, S., Korhonen, K., Malmi, J., Nyk€anen, A., et al.
(2022). Quantum network medicine: rethinking medicine with network
science and quantum algorithms. Preprint at arXiv. https://doi.org/10.
48550/arXiv.2206.12405.
63. Sagingalieva, A., Kordzanganeh, M., Kenbayev, N., Kosichkina, D., Tom-
ashuk, T., and Melnikov, A. (2023). Hybrid quantum neural network for
drug response prediction. Cancer 15, 2705.
64. Prins, B.P., Kuchenbaecker, K.B., Bao, Y., Smart, M., Zabaneh, D., Fate-
mifar, G., Luan, J., Wareham, N.J., Scott, R.A., Perry, J.R.B., et al. (2017).
Genome-wide analysis of health-related biomarkers in the UK Household
Longitudinal Study reveals novel associations. Sci. Rep. 7, 11008.
65. Bubeck, S., and Sellke, M. (2023). A universal law of robustness via iso-
perimetry. J. ACM 70, 1–18.
66. Kaplan, J., McCandlish, S., Henighan, T., Brown, T.B., Chess, B., Child,
R., Gray, S., Radford, A., Wu, J., and Amodei, D. (2020). Scaling laws for
neural language models. Preprint at arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/ar-
Xiv.2001.08361.
67. Hoffmann, J., Borgeaud, S., Mensch, A., Buchatskaya, E., Cai, T., Ruth-
erford, E., de Las Casas, D., Hendricks, L.A., Welbl, J., Clark, J., et al.
(2022). Training compute-optimal large language models. Preprint at ar-
Xiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2203.15556.
68. Tang, E. (2021). Quantum Principal Component Analysis Only Achieves
an Exponential Speedup Because of Its State Preparation Assumptions.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 127, 060503. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.127.
060503.
69. Phalak, K., Chatterjee, A., and Ghosh, S. (2023). Quantum random ac-
cess memory for dummies. Sensors 23, 7462.
70. Harrow, A.W. (2020). Small quantum computers and large classical data
sets. Preprint at arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2004.00026.
71. Yogendran, B., Charlton, D., Beddig, M., Kolotouros, I., and Wallden, P.
(2024). Big data applications on small quantum computers. Preprint at ar-
Xiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2402.01529.
72. Chen, M., Tan, X., and Padman, R. (2020). Social determinants of health
in electronic health records and their impact on analysis and risk predic-
tion: a systematic review. J. Am. Med. Inf. Assoc. 27, 1764–1773.
73. Ravizza, S., Huschto, T., Adamov, A., Bo¨ hm, L., B€usser, A., Flo¨ ther, F.F.,
Hinzmann, R., Ko¨ nig, H., McAhren, S.M., Robertson, D.H., et al. (2019).
Predicting the early risk of chronic kidney disease in patients with dia-
betes using real-world data. Nat. Med. 25, 57–59.
74. Li, Y., Rao, S., Solares, J.R.A., Hassaine, A., Ramakrishnan, R., Canoy,
D., Zhu, Y., Rahimi, K., and Salimi-Khorshidi, G. (2020). BEHRT: trans-
former for electronic health records. Sci. Rep. 10, 7155.
75. Adamson, B., Waskom, M., Blarre, A., Kelly, J., Krismer, K., Nemeth, S.,
Gippetti, J., Ritten, J., Harrison, K., Ho, G., et al. (2023). Approach to ma-
chine learning for extraction of real-world data variables from electronic
health records. Front. Pharmacol. 14, 1180962.
76. Singhal, P., Tan, A.L.M., Drivas, T., Johnson, K., Ritchie, M., and Beau-
lieu-Jones, B. (2023). Opportunities and challenges for biomarker dis-
covery using electronic health record data. Trends Mol. Med. 29,
765–776.
77. Mosley, J.D., Feng, Q., Wells, Q.S., Van Driest, S.L., Shaffer, C.M., Ed-
wards, T.L., Bastarache, L., Wei, W.Q., Davis, L.K., McCarty, C.A.,
et al. (2018). A study paradigm integrating prospective epidemiologic co-
horts and electronic health records to identify disease biomarkers. Nat.
Commun. 9, 3522.
78. Mohsen, F., Ali, H., El Hajj, N., and Shah, Z. (2022). Artiﬁcial intelligence-
based methods for fusion of electronic health records and imaging data.
Sci. Rep. 12, 17981.
79. Steyaert, S., Pizurica, M., Nagaraj, D., Khandelwal, P., Hernandez-Bous-
sard, T., Gentles, A.J., and Gevaert, O. (2023). Multimodal data fusion for
cancer biomarker discovery with deep learning. Nat. Mach. Intell. 5,
351–362.
80. Assale, M., Dui, L.G., Cina, A., Seveso, A., and Cabitza, F. (2019). The
revival of the notes ﬁeld: leveraging the unstructured content in electronic
health records. Front. Med. 6, 66.
81. Tam, V., Patel, N., Turcotte, M., Bosse´ , Y., Pare´ , G., and Meyre, D. (2019).
Beneﬁts and limitations of genome-wide association studies. Nat. Rev.
Genet. 20, 467–484.
82. Uffelmann, E., Huang, Q.Q., Munung, N.S., de Vries, J., Okada, Y., Mar-
tin, A.R., Martin, H.C., Lappalainen, T., and Posthuma, D. (2021).
Genome-wide association studies. Nat. Rev. Methods Primers 1, 59.
83. Donoho, D.L. (2000). High-dimensional data analysis: The curses and
blessings of dimensionality. AMS math challenges lecture. 1, 32.
84. Pudjihartono, N., Fadason, T., Kempa-Liehr, A.W., and O’Sullivan, J.M.
(2022). A review of feature selection methods for machine learning-based
disease risk prediction. Front. Bioinform. 2, 927312.
85. Nguyen, P.N. (2024). Biomarker discovery with quantum neural net-
works: a case-study in CTLA4-activation pathways. BMC Bioinf. 25, 149.
86. Saggi, M.K., Bhatia, A.S., Isaiah, M., Gowher, H., and Kais, S. (2024).
Multi-Omic and quantum machine learning integration for lung sub-
types classiﬁcation. Preprint at arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.
2410.02085.
87. Albert, F.W., and Kruglyak, L. (2015). The role of regulatory variation in
complex traits and disease. Nat. Rev. Genet. 16, 197–212.
88. Na1e˛ cz-Charkiewicz, K., Charkiewicz, K., and Nowak, R.M. (2024). Quan-
tum computing in bioinformatics: a systematic review mapping. Brief.
Bioinform 25, bbae391.
89. Price, A.L., Patterson, N.J., Plenge, R.M., Weinblatt, M.E., Shadick, N.A.,
and Reich, D. (2006). Principal components analysis corrects for stratiﬁ-
cation in genome-wide association studies. Nat. Genet. 38, 904–909.
90. Li, Z., Chai, Z., Guo, Y., Ji, W., Wang, M., Shi, F., Wang, Y., Lloyd, S., and
Du, J. (2021). Resonant quantum principal component analysis. Sci. Adv.
7, eabg2589. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.abg2589.
91. Uffelmann, E., and Posthuma, D. (2021). Emerging methods and re-
sources for biological interrogation of neuropsychiatric polygenic signal.
Biol. Psychiatry. 89, 41–53.
92. Holland, D., Frei, O., Desikan, R., Fan, C.C., Shadrin, A.A., Smeland,
O.B., Sundar, V.S., Thompson, P., Andreassen, O.A., and Dale, A.M.
(2020). Beyond SNP heritability: Polygenicity and discoverability of phe-
notypes estimated with a univariate Gaussian mixture model. PLoS
Genet. 16, e1008612.
93. Slatkin, M. (2008). Linkage disequilibrium—understanding the evolu-
tionary past and mapping the medical future. Nat. Rev. Genet. 9,
477–485.
94. Navascue´ s, M., and Wolfe, E. (2020). The Inﬂation Technique Completely
Solves the Causal Compatibility Problem. J. Causal Inference 8, 70–91.
https://doi.org/10.1515/jci-2018-0008.
95. Chiribella, G., and Ebler, D. (2019). Quantum speedup in the identiﬁcation
of cause–effect relations. Nat. Commun. 10, 1472.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
12
Patterns 6, June 13, 2025
Perspective

96. Nica, A.C., and Dermitzakis, E.T. (2013). Expression quantitative trait loci:
present and future. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 368,
20120362.
97. Khalsan, M., Machado, L.R., Al-Shamery, E.S., Ajit, S., Anthony, K., Mu,
M., and Agyeman, M.O. (2022). A survey of machine learning approaches
applied to gene expression analysis for cancer prediction. IEEE Access
10, 27522–27534.
98. Chen, Z., Chen, S., and Qiang, X. (2022). Identiﬁcation of Biomarker in
Brain-speciﬁc Gene Regulatory Network Using Structural Controllability
Analysis. Front. Bioinform. 2, 812314.
99. Zhang, Z., Sun, C., and Liu, Z.P. (2022). Discovering biomarkers of hepa-
tocellular carcinoma from single-cell RNA sequencing data by coopera-
tive games on gene regulatory network. Journal of Computational Sci-
ence 65, 101881. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jocs.2022.101881.
100. Roman-Vicharra, C., and Cai, J.J. (2023). Quantum gene regulatory net-
works. npj Quantum Inf. 9, 67. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41534-023-
00740-6.
101. Osorio, D., Yu, X., Yu, P., Serpedin, E., and Cai, J.J. (2019). Single-cell
RNA sequencing of a European and an African lymphoblastoid cell line.
Sci. Data 6, 112. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-019-0116-4.
102. SoRelle, E.D., Dai, J., Bonglack, E.N., Heckenberg, E.M., Zhou, J.Y.,
Giamberardino, S.N., Bailey, J.A., Gregory, S.G., Chan, C., and Luftig,
M.A. (2021). Single-cell RNA-seq reveals transcriptomic heterogeneity
mediated by host–pathogen dynamics in lymphoblastoid cell lines. Elife
10, e62586. https://doi.org/10.7554/elife.62586.
103. Al-Janabee, O., and Al-Sarray, B. (2023). Review of clustering for gene
expression data. AIP Conf. Proc. 2516, 070019.
104. Rodriguez, M.Z., Comin, C.H., Casanova, D., Bruno, O.M., Amancio,
D.R., Costa, L.F., and Rodrigues, F.A. (2019). Clustering algorithms: A
comparative approach. PLoS One 14, e0210236.
105. Wang, D., Tan, D., and Liu, L. (2018). Particle swarm optimization algo-
rithm: an overview. Soft Comput. 22, 387–408.
106. Sun, J., Feng, B., and Xu, W. (2004). Particle swarm optimization with
particles having quantum behavior. Proceedings of the 2004 Congress
on Evolutionary Computation (IEEE Cat. No.04TH8753) 1, 325–331.
107. Clerc, M., and Kennedy, J. (2002). The particle swarm - explosion, stabil-
ity, and convergence in a multidimensional complex space. IEEE Trans.
Evol. Comput. 6, 58–73. https://doi.org/10.1109/4235.985692.
108. van den Bergh, F. (2001). An Analysis of Particle Swarm Optimizers (Uni-
versity of Pretoria), PhD Thesis.
109. Chen, W., Sun, J., Ding, Y., Fang, W., and Xu, W. (2008). Clustering of
Gene Expression Data with Quantum-Behaved Particle Swarm Optimi-
zation. In New Frontiers in Applied Artiﬁcial Intelligence, N.T. Nguyen,
L. Borzemski, A. Grzech, and M. Ali, eds. (Springer Berlin Heidelberg),
pp. 388–396.
110. Sun, J., Chen, W., Fang, W., Wun, X., and Xu, W. (2012). Gene expression
data analysis with the clustering method based on an improved quan-
tum-behaved Particle Swarm Optimization. Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 25,
376–391. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2011.09.017.
111. Dabba, A., Tari, A., and Meftali, S. (2020). Hybridization of Moth ﬂame
optimization algorithm and quantum computing for gene selection in mi-
croarray data. J. Ambient Intell. Hum. Comput. 12, 2731–2750. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s12652-020-02434-9.
112. Fallahi, S., and Taghadosi, M. (2022). Quantum-behaved particle swarm
optimization based on solitons. Sci. Rep. 12, 13977. https://doi.org/10.
1038/s41598-022-18351-0.
113. Elaraby, A. (2022). Quantum medical images processing foundations and
applications. IET Quantum Communication 3, 201–213.
114. Wei, L., Liu, H., Xu, J., Shi, L., Shan, Z., Zhao, B., and Gao, Y. (2023).
Quantum machine learning in medical image analysis: A survey. Neuro-
computing 525, 42–53.
115. Zack, M.M., and Kobau, R. (2017). National and state estimates of the
numbers of adults and children with active epilepsy—United States,
2015. MMWR Morb. Mortal. Wkly. Rep. 66, 821–825.
116. Anuradha, R., Vandana, C., Singh, S.V., Singh, N., Emad, R., and Nitin, V.
(2024). Integrating Quantum Computing for Enhanced Image Recon-
struction in Medical Diagnostics. In 2024 International Conference on
Communication, Computer Sciences and Engineering (IC3SE) (IEEE),
pp. 1294–1298.
117. Yang, L., Vetter, C., and Qiu, F. (2020). Volume rendering from three-
dimensional medical data using quantum computing. US patent
US20200242816A1.
118. Cascarano, A., Mur-Petit, J., Herna´ ndez-Gonza´ lez, J., Camacho, M., de
Toro Eadie, N., Gkontra, P., Chadeau-Hyam, M., Vitria` , J., and Lekadir, K.
(2023). Machine and deep learning for longitudinal biomedical data: a re-
view of methods and applications. Artif. Intell. Rev. 56, 1711–1771.
119. Snyder-Mackler, N., Burger, J.R., Gaydosh, L., Belsky, D.W., Noppert,
G.A., Campos, F.A., Bartolomucci, A., Yang, Y.C., Aiello, A.E., O’Rand,
A., et al. (2020). Social determinants of health and survival in humans
and other animals. Science 368, eaax9553.
120. Mujal, P., Martı´nez-Pen˜ a, R., Giorgi, G.L., Soriano, M.C., and Zambrini,
R. (2023). Time-series quantum reservoir computing with weak and pro-
jective measurements. npj Quantum Inf. 9, 16.
121. Daskin,
A.
(2022).
A
walk
through
of
time
series
analysis
on
quantum computers. Preprint
at arXiv.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.
2205.00986.
122. Benjamin, M.A., Rigby, R.A., and Stasinopoulos, D.M. (2003). General-
ized autoregressive moving average models. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 98,
214–223.
123. Van Houdt, G., Mosquera, C., and Na´ poles, G. (2020). A review on the
long short-term memory model. Artif. Intell. Rev. 53, 5929–5955.
124. Mujal, P., Martı´nez-Pen˜ a, R., Nokkala, J., Garcı´a-Beni, J., Giorgi, G.L.,
and Soriano, M.C. (2021). Opportunities in quantum reservoir computing
and extreme learning machines. Advanced Quantum Technologies 4,
2100027.
125. Takaki, Y., Mitarai, K., Negoro, M., Fujii, K., and Kitagawa, M. (2021).
Learning temporal data with a variational quantum recurrent neural
network. Phys. Rev. A 103, 052414.
126. Lukosevicius, M. (2012). A practical guide to applying echo state net-
works. In Neural Networks: Tricks of the Trade, Second Edition
(Springer), pp. 659–686.
127. Fernando, C., and Sojakka, S. (2003). Pattern recognition in a bucket. In
European conference on artiﬁcial life (Springer), pp. 588–597.
128. Tanaka, G., Yamane, T., He´ roux, J.B., Nakane, R., Kanazawa, N.,
Takeda, S., Numata, H., Nakano, D., and Hirose, A. (2019). Recent ad-
vances in physical reservoir computing: A review. Neural Netw. 115,
100–123.
129. Komariah, K.S., and Sin, B.K. (2019). Health state modeling and predic-
tion based on hidden Markov models. In 2019 Eleventh International
Conference on Ubiquitous and Future Networks (ICUFN) (IEEE),
pp. 245–250.
130. Dinh-Le, C., Chuang, R., Chokshi, S., and Mann, D. (2019). Wearable
health technology and electronic health record integration: scoping re-
view and future directions. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 7, e12861.
131. Sempionatto, J.R., Lasalde-Ramı´rez, J.A., Mahato, K., Wang, J., and
Gao, W. (2022). Wearable chemical sensors for biomarker discovery in
the omics era. Nat. Rev. Chem 6, 899–915.
132. Kourtis, L.C., Regele, O.B., Wright, J.M., and Jones, G.B. (2019). Digital
biomarkers for Alzheimer’s disease: the mobile/wearable devices oppor-
tunity. npj Digit. Med. 2, 9.
133. Aslam, N., Zhou, H., Urbach, E.K., Turner, M.J., Walsworth, R.L., Lukin,
M.D., and Park, H. (2023). Quantum sensors for biomedical applications.
Nat. Rev. Phys. 5, 157–169.
134. Hershberger, C.E., Louis, S., Busch, R.M., Vegh, D., Najm, I., Bazeley, P.,
Eng, C., Jehi, L., and Rotroff, D.M. (2023). Molecular subtypes of epilepsy
associated with post-surgical seizure recurrence. Brain Commun. 5,
fcad251.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Patterns 6, June 13, 2025
13
Perspective

135. Mihajlovic, K., Ceddia, G., Malod-Dognin, N., Novak, G., Kyriakis, D.,
Skupin, A., and Przulj, N. (2024). Multi-omics integration of scRNA-seq
time series data predicts new intervention points for Parkinson’s disease.
Sci. Rep. 14, 10983.
136. Parry, E.M., Leshchiner, I., Guie` ze, R., Johnson, C., Tausch, E., Parikh,
S.A., Lemvigh, C., Brose´ us, J., Hergalant, S., Messer, C., et al. (2023).
Evolutionary history of transformation from chronic lymphocytic leukemia
to Richter syndrome. Nat. Med. 29, 158–169.
137. Parsons, H.A., Messer, C., Santos, K., Danysh, B.P., Hughes, M.E., Patel,
A., Jacobs, R.A., Slowik, K., Hess, J., Stewart, C., et al. (2023). Abstract
3874: Genomic mechanisms of resistance to tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs) in HER2+ metastatic breast cancer (HER2+ MBC). Cancer Res.
83, 3874.
138. Naeem, A., Li, L., Utro, F., Cha, J., Tsuji, J., Fernandes, S.M., Azevedo,
R.S., Morelli, F., Wang, Z., Shupe, S.J., et al. (2023). Understanding
Resistance Mechanisms and Growth Kinetics of CLL Treated with Cova-
lent and Non-Covalent BTK Inhibitors. Blood 142, 4623.
139. Burr, R., Leshchiner, I., Costantino, C.L., Blohmer, M., Sundaresan, T.,
Cha, J., Seeger, K., Guay, S., Danysh, B.P., Gore, I., et al. (2024). Devel-
opmental mosaicism underlying EGFR-mutant lung cancer presenting
with multiple primary tumors. Nat. Cancer 5, 1681–1696.
140. Khan, K.H., Cunningham, D., Werner, B., Vlachogiannis, G., Spiteri, I.,
Heide, T., Mateos, J.F., Vatsiou, A., Lampis, A., Damavandi, M.D.,
et al. (2018). Longitudinal Liquid Biopsy and Mathematical Modeling of
Clonal Evolution Forecast Time to Treatment Failure in the PROSPECT-
C Phase II Colorectal Cancer Clinical Trial. Cancer Discov. 8, 1270–
1285. https://doi.org/10.1158/2159-8290.cd-17-0891.
141. Mathios, D., Johansen, J.S., Cristiano, S., Medina, J.E., Phallen, J.,
Larsen, K.R., Bruhm, D.C., Niknafs, N., Ferreira, L., Adleff, V., et al.
(2021). Detection and characterization of lung cancer using cell-free
DNA fragmentomes. Nat. Commun. 12, 5060.
142. Rolfo, C., and Russo, A. (2023). Brave new world of cfDNA-omics for
early cancer detection. J. Immunother. Cancer 11, e006309.
143. Shi, M., and Mollah, S. (2021). NeTOIF: A Network-based Approach for
Time-Series Omics Data Imputation and Forecasting. Preprint at bioRxiv.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2205.00986.
144. Ruiz-Perez, D., Lugo-Martinez, J., Bourguignon, N., Mathee, K., Lerner,
B., Bar-Joseph, Z., and Narasimhan, G. (2021). Dynamic bayesian net-
works for integrating multi-omics time series microbiome data. mSys-
tems 6, e0110520.
145. Hou, K., Wu, Z.X., Chen, X.Y., Wang, J.Q., Zhang, D., Xiao, C., Zhu, D.,
Koya, J.B., Wei, L., Li, J., and Chen, Z.S. (2022). Microbiota in health
and diseases. Signal Transduct. Target. Ther. 7, 135.
146. Buytaers, F.E., Berger, N., Van der Heyden, J., Roosens, N.H.C., and De
Keersmaecker, S.C.J. (2024). The potential of including the microbiome
as biomarker in population-based health studies: methods and beneﬁts.
Front. Public Health 12, 1467121.
147. Gyurik, C., Schmidhuber, A., King, R., Dunjko, V., and Hayakawa, R.
(2024). Quantum computing and persistence in topological data analysis.
Preprint at arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2410.21258.
148. He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., and Sun, J. (2016). Deep residual learning for
image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition (IEEE), pp. 770–778.
149. Du, Y., Hsieh, M.H., Liu, T., Tao, D., and Liu, N. (2021). Quantum noise
protects quantum classiﬁers against adversaries. Phys. Rev. Res. 3,
023153.
150. Resch, S., and Karpuzcu, U.R. (2021). Benchmarking quantum com-
puters and the impact of quantum noise. ACM Comput. Surv. 54, 1–35.
151. Kiwit, F.J., Wolf, M.A., Marso, M., Ross, P., Lorenz, J.M., Riofrı´o, C.A.,
and Luckow, A. (2024). Benchmarking quantum generative learning: A
study on scalability and noise resilience using QUARK. K€unstl. Intell.
38, 379–385.
152. Monzani, F., Ricci, E., Nigro, L., and Prati, E. (2024). Leveraging non-uni-
tal noise for gate-based quantum reservoir computing. Preprint at arXiv.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2409.07886.
153. Sivak, V.V., Eickbusch, A., Royer, B., Singh, S., Tsioutsios, I., Ganjam, S.,
Miano, A., Brock, B.L., Ding, A.Z., Frunzio, L., et al. (2023). Real-time
quantum error correction beyond break-even. Nature 616, 50–55.
154. Karimi, D., Dou, H., Warﬁeld, S.K., and Gholipour, A. (2020). Deep
learning with noisy labels: Exploring techniques and remedies in medical
image analysis. Med. Image Anal. 65, 101759.
155. Algan, G., and Ulusoy, I. (2021). Image classiﬁcation with deep learning in
the presence of noisy labels: A survey. Knowl. Base Syst. 215, 106771.
156. Song, H., Kim, M., Park, D., Shin, Y., and Lee, J.G. (2023). Learning from
noisy labels with deep neural networks: A survey. IEEE Transact. Neural
Networks Learn. Syst. 34, 8135–8153.
157. Liang, W., Tadesse, G.A., Ho, D., Fei-Fei, L., Zaharia, M., Zhang, C., and
Zou, J. (2022). Advances, challenges and opportunities in creating data
for trustworthy AI. Nat. Mach. Intell. 4, 669–677.
158. Khatun, A., Aydeniz, K.Y., Weinstein, Y.S., and Usman, M. (2024). Quan-
tum Generative Learning for High-Resolution Medical Image Generation.
Preprint at arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2406.13196.
159. Guan, J., Fang, W., and Ying, M. (2022). Verifying fairness in quantum
machine learning. In International Conference on Computer Aided Veriﬁ-
cation (Springer), pp. 408–429.
160. Otgonbaatar, S., Schwarz, G., Datcu, M., and Kranzlm€uller, D. (2023).
Quantum transfer learning for real-world, small, and high-dimensional
remotely sensed datasets. IEEE J. Sel. Top. Appl. Earth Obs. Remote
Sens. 16, 9223–9230.
161. Maheshwari, D., Ullah, U., Marulanda, P.A.O., Jurado, A.G.O., Gonzalez,
I.D., Merodio, J.M.O., and Garcia-Zapirain, B. (2023). Quantum machine
learning applied to electronic healthcare records for ischemic heart dis-
ease classiﬁcation. Hum-Cent Comput Inf Sci 13.
162. Krunic, Z., Flo¨ ther, F.F., Seegan, G., Earnest-Noble, N., and Omar, S.
(2022). Quantum kernels for real-world predictions based on electronic
health records. IEEE Trans. Quantum Eng. 3, 1–11.
163. Hibat-Allah, M., Mauri, M., Carrasquilla, J., and Perdomo-Ortiz, A. (2024).
A
framework
for
demonstrating
practical
quantum
advantage:
comparing quantum against classical generative models. Commun.
Phys. 7, 68.
164. Kazdaghli, S., Kerenidis, I., Kieckbusch, J., and Teare, P. (2024).
Improved clinical data imputation via classical and quantum determi-
nantal point processes. Elife 12, RP89947.
165. Wang, L., Liu, Y., Meng, F., Luan, T., Liu, W., Zhang, Z., and Yu, X. (2024).
A quantum synthetic aperture radar image denoising algorithm based on
grayscale morphology. iScience 27, 109627.
166. Zhou, Y., Wong, Y.K., and Liang, Y.S. (2024). Quantum image denoising
with machine learning: a novel approach to improve quantum image pro-
cessing quality and reliability. In Sixteenth International Conference on
Digital Image Processing (ICDIP 2024), 13274 (SPIE), pp. 427–435.
167. Haque, M.E., Paul, M., Ulhaq, A., and Debnath, T. (2023). Advanced
quantum image representation and compression using a DCT-EFRQI
approach. Sci. Rep. 13, 4129.
168. Deb, S.K., and Pan, W.D. (2024). Quantum Image Compression: Funda-
mentals, Algorithms, and Advances. Computers 13, 185.
169. Ben Yedder, H., Cardoen, B., and Hamarneh, G. (2021). Deep learning for
biomedical image reconstruction: A survey. Artif. Intell. Rev. 54, 215–251.
170. Li, J., and Tong, Y. (2024). Exponential Quantum Advantage for Path-
ﬁnding in Regular Sunﬂower Graphs. Preprint at arXiv. https://doi.org/
10.48550/arXiv.2407.14398.
171. Li, W., Lu, S., and Deng, D.L. (2021). Quantum federated learning through
blind quantum computing. Sci. China Phys. Mech. Astron. 64, 100312.
172. Chehimi, M., and Saad, W. (2022). Quantum federated learning
with quantum data. In ICASSP 2022-2022 IEEE International Conference
on
Acoustics,
Speech
and
Signal
Processing
(ICASSP)
(IEEE),
pp. 8617–8621.
173. Huang, R., Tan, X., and Xu, Q. (2022). Quantum federated learning with
decentralized data. IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quant. Electron. 28, 1–10.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
14
Patterns 6, June 13, 2025
Perspective

174. Bhatia, A.S., Kais, S., and Alam, M.A. (2023). Federated quanvolutional
neural network: a new paradigm for collaborative quantum learning.
Quantum Sci. Technol. 8, 045032.
175. Sheller, M.J., Edwards, B., Reina, G.A., Martin, J., Pati, S., Kotrotsou, A.,
Milchenko, M., Xu, W., Marcus, D., Colen, R.R., and Bakas, S. (2020).
Federated learning in medicine: facilitating multi-institutional collabora-
tions without sharing patient data. Sci. Rep. 10, 12598.
176. Rieke, N., Hancox, J., Li, W., Milletarı`, F., Roth, H.R., Albarqouni, S., Ba-
kas, S., Galtier, M.N., Landman, B.A., Maier-Hein, K., et al. (2020). The
future of digital health with federated learning. npj Digit. Med. 3, 119.
177. Prasad, V.K., Bhattacharya, P., Maru, D., Tanwar, S., Verma, A., Singh,
A., Tiwari, A.K., Sharma, R., Alkhayyat, A., Țurcanu, F.E., and Raboaca,
M.S. (2022). Federated learning for the internet-of-medical-things: A sur-
vey. Mathematics 11, 151.
178. Enroth, S., Johansson, A˚ ., Enroth, S.B., and Gyllensten, U. (2014). Strong
effects of genetic and lifestyle factors on biomarker variation and use of
personalized cutoffs. Nat. Commun. 5, 4684.
179. Seskir, Z.C., Umbrello, S., Coenen, C., and Vermaas, P.E. (2023).
Democratization of quantum technologies. Quantum Sci. Technol. 8,
024005.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Patterns 6, June 13, 2025
15
Perspective
