Source-PDF: D:\Review\New folder\Main\Core quantumbiomed + health relevance\Principles of Quantum Mechanics for Artificial Intelligence in medicine. Discussion with reference to the Quantum Universal Exchange Language (Q-UEL).pdf
Relative-Path: New folder\Main\Core quantumbiomed + health relevance\Principles of Quantum Mechanics for Artificial Intelligence in medicine. Discussion with reference to the Quantum Universal Exchange Language (Q-UEL).pdf
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Computers in Biology and Medicine 143 (2022) 105323
Available online 16 February 2022
0010-4825/© 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Principles of Quantum Mechanics for Artificial Intelligence in medicine. 
Discussion with reference to the Quantum Universal Exchange Language 
(Q-UEL) 
Barry Robson a,b,*, Jim St. Clair c 
a The Dirac Foundation, Oxfordshire, UK 
b Ingine Inc, USA 
c Linux Foundation Public Health, San Franciso, USA   
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Keywords: 
Quantum mechanics 
Quantum computing 
Artificial intelligence 
Clinical decision support 
Hyperbolic complex 
Split-complex 
A B S T R A C T   
This paper reviews some basic principles of Quantum Mechanics, Quantum Computing, and Artificial Intelli
gence in terms of a specific unifying theme. This theme relates to the hyperbolic or split-complex imaginary 
numbers and their equivalent matrices, rediscovered by Dirac, and the underlying mathematics of the previously 
described Q-UEL language based on them. Hyperbolic imaginary numbers h have the property hh = +1: contrast 
the more familiar i such that ii = −1. Examples of analogous matrices include that for the Hadamard gate as used 
in quantum computing and the Pauli spin matrices, and all Hermitian matrices of interest in quantum computing 
can readily be derived from these. They also relate to Dirac dualization, spinor projectors of Quantum Field 
Theory, the non-wave-like part of quantum theory, collapse of the wave function, and a dualized form of classical 
probability theory that has advantages in automated reasoning for medicine.   
1. Introduction 
1.1. Background 
The title of this paper draws respectfully on the title of Paul A. M. 
Dirac’s foundational book “Principles of Quantum Mechanics” that 
provided the basis for many of the ideas described here [1]. An impor
tant feature is the Dirac notation [2], a powerful system of algebraic 
representation and its algebraic manipulation that he developed for later 
editions of his book. In particular, the role of operators in transforming 
information about states of things expressed as vectors is greatly clarified 
and facilitated by his approach. As discussed in this review, this has deep 
relevance to quantum computing (QC) and the Dirac notation is 
commonly used in introductions to it and theoretical discussions of it. 
The direct relation to the mathematics for automated probabilistic 
reasoning in everyday areas such as medicine where uncertainty is 
prevalent, is less obvious. However, as he stated in Nobel Prize for 
Physics Banquet Speech in 1933, “The methods of theoretical physics 
should be applicable to all those branches of thought in which the 
essential features are expressible with numbers” [3]. This suggests the 
possibility of a more unified approach to QC and Artificial Intelligence 
(AI) for areas where probabilistic approaches are computationally 
intensive. Unfortunately, he did not make it entirely clear as to how to 
achieve this, although it is believed that the point was regarding his own 
insights into fundamental mathematical principles describing nature in 
general. Nonetheless, the essential features of his approach have been 
shown by the present author and collaborators to be relevant to Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) as automated reasoning of the kind appropriate to the 
familiar everyday world of human experience, including medicine. This 
is reviewed in this paper but see Ref. [4] as a simple introduction, which 
also introduces the Quantum Universal Exchange Language (Q-UEL) 
based on the Dirac notation used at intervals throughout this text. An 
example of an important application is clinical decision support based 
on odds inference nets that involve machine learning as high dimen
sional data mining of large numbers of medical records, and prediction 
sometimes involving millions of multifactor probabilities derived from it 
(e.g., Ref. [5]). 
Abbreviations: QM, Quantum Mechanics; QC, Quantum Computing; AI, Artificial Intelligence; QFT, Quantum Field Theory. 
* Corresponding author. The Dirac Foundation, Oxfordshire, UK. 
E-mail address: barryrobson@ingine.com (B. Robson).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Computers in Biology and Medicine 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/compbiomed 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiomed.2022.105323 
Received 28 December 2021; Received in revised form 30 January 2022; Accepted 13 February 2022   

Computers in Biology and Medicine 143 (2022) 105323
2
1.2. Purpose and structure 
Is there an underlying common theoretical structure of AI and 
quantum computing? Might they be unified into a single discipline? This 
paper is a scope review that addresses some basic principles of Quantum 
Mechanics (QM), Quantum Computing (QC), and Artificial Intelligence 
(AI). To do so, it focuses on the underlying mathematics and interpre
tation of AI as approached by Q-UEL and its relation to, and overlap 
with, Dirac’s quantum mechanics and true quantum computing. It is not 
intended to be an extensive literature review in the normal sense, 
because there are also many books and special editions of journals 
reviewing QM, QC, and AI, as discussed in Section 1.3. Reference should 
be made to the well-regarded extensive review in the QC book by 
Nielsen and Chuang, now in its 10th edition [6]. However, sufficient 
detail must be given in this review to enable some development. Some 
occasional features take a less common perspective with arguable ele
ments of novelty, albeit that they usually find their ultimate origin in 
Dirac [1]. That also requires reviewing some of the work of author BR 
and collaborators over the past few years. The area covered includes 
topics that not too well known outside the specific areas such as 
Quantum Field Theory (QFT) and particle physics. It relates to the hy
perbolic or split-complex imaginary numbers and their analogous 
matrices, rediscovered by Dirac, i.e., mathematical entities that, unlike 
the more familiar imaginary number i that is the square root of minus 
one such that ii = −1, instead square to plus one such that hh = +1 or to 
a similar entity as an identity matrix. The h-complex part of QM appears 
to have its own deep significance in bridging the gap between i-complex 
QM as wave mechanics and the everyday classical world of human 
experience. This is important if the mathematical machinery of QM is to 
be relevant to application in areas such as clinical decision support. 
For the structure and overview of this review paper, see Fig. 1. 
Introduction Section 1 focuses on the general background and motiva
tion for the review. Section 1.3 discusses the status of QC and Section 1.4 
discusses its relevance to biology and medicine. Section 1.5 digs more 
specifically into the relevance to A.I., taking the opportunity to review 
the work of author BR and collaborators relating to algorithms based on 
the Dirac notation and algebra, and showing the benefits of the Q-UEL 
language. Section 1.6 discusses how the capabilities of QC for factorizing 
products of primes extend to important tools in the AI toolkit, notably 
high dimensional data mining. While that may seem to be a special 
example, the ability to relate several aspects of AI to number theory may 
make the applicability of number theoretic problems addressed by QC to 
have much broader implications. Section 1.7 reviews other and further 
related work. 
Theory Section 2 reviews the basic principles and mathematics behind 
the Q-UEL language and relevant to QM, QC, and AI. Sections 2.1 
through to 2.6 provide a general introduction to the Dirac notation and 
the relevant features of quantum mechanics. It is a "quantum mechanics 
primer", albeit from the authors’ perspective, and with an emphasis on 
aspects considered important in AI and QC. The aspects discussed will be 
familiar to readers of early chapters in many QM textbooks, and could be 
skipped by such readers, but which will be a necessary basis for what 
follows and are particularly expressed with that in mind. They also 
provide an occasional opportunity to provide some examples and no
tations used in author BR’s approach. Sections 2.7 to 2.9 extend the 
more familiar description of QM to the use of the less familiar hyperbolic 
complex (or split-complex) imaginary number h and some related 
matrices of importance in QC. A brief Section 2.10 links the above to 
physics, and Section 2.11 develops that to argue how h appears to relate 
to collapse of the wave function and classical logic. 
Methods Section 3 describes the application to QC. Sections 3.1 to 3.4. 
describe the quantum logic gates used and how they relate to the 
matrices of Section 2. Q-UEL notation and formats are used to express 
most of the matrices and vectors in a simple, concise, linear way. Section 
3.4 specifically discusses the concept of measurement and a measure
ment gate, which relates back to Section 2.10. It emphasizes how the 
quantum computations that imply i-complex processes can, in general 
terms at least, be limited to a quantum chip interacting through prep
aration and measurement to an h-complex environment modelled on 
standard digital processors. Section 3.5 is somewhat a special case 
intended to extend the ideas of the quantum computation to the above 
environment by exemplifying how operations using matrices with real 
and i-complex elements can be easily extended to h-complex 
counterparts. 
Results and Discussion Section 4 discusses some important results and 
conclusions. The title of this Section is somewhat a misnomer because the 
present paper is both a review and essentially theoretical. However, it 
describes some implications for matrices by which one may construct 
circuits on a quantum logic chip with the same action as the matrices 
and corresponding imaginary numbers rediscovered by Dirac and used 
in the digital algorithms. It is shown how the essential new features of 
these quantum circuits may be replaced by corresponding single novel 
Fig. 1. Structure of this Review Paper.  
B. Robson and J. St. Clair                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Computers in Biology and Medicine 143 (2022) 105323
3
quantum logic gates, the nature of which are specified as single matrices, 
which is in principle sufficient for their design as hardware. Some fea
tures of the Q-UEL language as a “results” are compared with a quantum 
computing language, emphasizing Q-UEL’s simplicity. 
Conclusions Section 5 adds final remarks including brief comparison 
with some related work. Throughout the paper, some comment is given 
from time to time on why the Q-UEL language and related approaches 
preferred by author BR (e.g., Refs. [4,5]) have advantages, as requested 
by one reviewer. For brevity, this will largely be a brief explanation 
sufficient for the argument presented, with reference to published, peer 
reviewed works from which fuller details can be obtained. However, the 
aim here is not to promote the Q-UEL language as such, but to help lay a 
basis to a theory of a core common to QC and AI, and to use the 
convenient notation of Q-UEL that is based on Dirac’s. 
The quest for a deeper union between AI and QC makes this review a 
little different from those of other authors. Primarily, other authors see 
QC as opening the door to solving very large and complex computational 
problems that are basically impossible to solve on traditional computers, 
because an enormous amount of time would be required. However, in 
principle a powerful classic digital computer could handle many of the 
same problems. The theoretical model called the Turing Machine defines 
any computer that is possible in principle as a state machine which 
consisted of two memories: states on an unbounded tape and states in 
control table. Whether the state machine is classical or quantum, the 
vectors and any adjustable operators in memory represent the states of a 
computer that can change to manage new algorithms or new input data, 
or both [6]. The issue for general computability is whether a machine 
satisfies requirements for the Turing machine - almost all classical 
computers do, and it is simply that quantum computers are believed to 
be exponentially more efficient than Turing machines [6]. In contrast, 
this present paper tries to find a deeper connection between AI and QC. 
1.3. Recent advances in true quantum computing 
How to construct and run quantum algorithms in theory has been 
postulated for some time [6] but making it work in practice has, until 
very recently, been difficult. Even simulating one quantum system using 
a simpler controllable one with some quantum features has presented 
both known and unexpected challenges, although early progress was 
made [7]. Theorizing about AI software or planning and simulating it 
using classical digital computers has become familiar: today, at the time 
of writing, there are probably some 50 reasonably well selling books in 
the English language concerning QC algorithms that include some 
reference to AI (e.g., Ref. [8]). Practical quantum computing in the sense 
of using real quantum hardware has not yet achieved. “Real quantum 
hardware” is defined as a computer capable of physically using quantum 
principles such as superposition of states, non-locality, and entangle
ment to perform algorithmic functions in a native quantum state. 
Until recently, quantum mechanical hardware faced barriers with 
the ability to hold more than 100 qubits in the quantum superposition 
state. If these barriers can be crossed, it would allow larger associated 
memory and more practical computations, and the natural continuity 
with our approach would become less academic. There has, however, 
been substantial recent progress. Notably, in November 2021, IBM un
veiled a 127-qubit quantum computing chip called Eagle. The Eagle chip 
that was announced is a quantum processor that is roughly the size of a 
thumbprint [9]. By being based on use of electrons and more familiar 
microchip and logic gate circuit thinking, Eagle is perhaps easier to 
understand than some alternative approaches. Unlike regular computer 
chips that encode information as 0 or 1 bits, quantum computers can 
represent information as qubits, which can have a value of 0, 1, but also 
both at the same time because of superposition. However, while IBM and 
Google work on superconducting qubits, Microsoft uses an approach 
called topological qubits, Honeywell is developing trapped-ion quantum 
computers, using electromagnetic fields to hold the ions, and microwave 
signals and lasers to encode them, while other approaches use neutral 
ions and spin states in molecules (e.g., Ref. [9]). In comparison with 
classical computing models, a quantum computer (or the quantum part 
of a computer system) is in part analogous to an analog computer, a 
computer that does not compute with binary digits but uses the 
continuously variable aspects of physical phenomena such as electrical, 
mechanical, or hydraulic quantities to model the problem being solved. 
The very nature of QM, however, complicates such interpretations: QC is 
exhibiting both particle and wave mechanics simultaneously, and this 
analog state is destroyed upon observation/measurement, thereby 
making it appear digital [6]. While the essential underlying physical 
phenomenon is still involves electrons, photons, ions, or atoms, their 
behavior at the quantum level is governed by the quantum mechanical 
wave function Ψ describing them, or underlying them, depending on 
one’s perspective. 
Current quantum processors are linked up to a more classical control 
system with electronics which are used to operate the quantum pro
cessor, usually by shining microwaves or putting a signal with a 
particular frequency, with each qubit labeled by its characteristic own 
frequency. Strictly speaking, the system exists not just as a distribution 
of electron probability and hence density in space but also in a phase 
space of, for example, momentum and position, or equivalently energy 
and time, in which space are time are intertwined. Time is important: 
the perceived time for utility arguably represents the true barrier to 
overcome. As also discussed in the present paper, the qubits inevitably 
start to interact with its environment, quantum information leaks out, 
resulting in decoherence, and “collapse of the wave function”. To 
minimize this, the Eagle chip follows the pattern set by other developers 
and operates at temperatures close to absolute zero. The coherence times 
for Eagle are in the range of 70–110 μs, with some evidence of obtaining 
a median time approaching a third of a second [9]. 
1.4. The relevance of quantum computing to biology and medicine 
For many years the mathematics of QM has been implemented on 
classical computers for use by physicists, chemists, drug designers, 
biophysicists, and material scientists, for quantum calculations [7–10]. 
But as Feynman stated, “Nature isn’t classical, dammit, and if you want 
to make a simulation of nature, you’d better make it quantum me
chanical, and by golly it’s a wonderful problem, because it doesn’t look 
so easy” (e.g., for discussion see Ref. [7]). Because of the enormous 
theoretical gains in processing efficiency, QC using real quantum com
puter hardware has huge potential importance, including for biology 
and medicine. Commonly quoted important applications of QC include 
true random number generation, optimization, planning, and logistics, 
forecasting, cybersecurity and cryptography, financial (market) 
modeling, quantum simulation (simulation of physical systems at the 
quantum mechanical level), chemistry modeling, computational chem
istry, drug design and discovery, genomics, material design and 
modeling, protein structure prediction, aerospace physics and space 
exploration, and artificial intelligence and machine learning, all of 
which could have, to varying extents, ultimate impact on healthcare. 
Dramatic speed gains by QC over classical computing seem likely 
whenever there are very large sets of multi-factor, combinatorial con
siderations; that is because a combinatorial explosion tends to make 
dramatic demands on computational resources because of the number of 
possibilities existing in parallel. This arguably deserves particular 
attention, and so is discussed separately in Section 1.6. 
Some problems in molecular biology, such as de novo predictions of 
protein structure by folding simulation, without reference to proteins of 
known structure, may prove to be intractable or unrealistically 
demanding and expensive without quantum computing because of the 
challenge of the accurate computation of the entropy. However, if 
rendered tractable, it could have broad applications and enable 
advanced nanotechnology [10]. In other applications, calculations such 
as protein-protein interactions may seem much more straightforward 
where there is not too much conformational flexibility involved, but 
B. Robson and J. St. Clair                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Computers in Biology and Medicine 143 (2022) 105323
4
they still need to be faster and more reliable, for example in response to 
emerging epidemics. In hindsight and in regard to the author’s other 
interest in fast response involving design of vaccines, diagnostics, and 
peptidomimetic drugs, there were particular studies concerning AIDS 
[11], Bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) or Mad Cow Disease 
[12], and COVID-19 (e.g. Ref. [13]) where it seemed likely that com
puter algorithms that were orders of magnitude faster would have 
facilitated explorative studies and would have been able to provide 
much more molecular detail in a shorter time. Less obvious applications 
of importance in tracking new strains of a pathogen during an epidemic 
include finding and aligning many related genomes and the construction 
of phylogenetic trees based on them, which if done rigorously is com
binatorically explosive and so computationally intensive. 
1.5. The Q-UEL language and the Hyperbolic Dirac Net 
To only a very limited extent is the present paper intended to follow 
the previous papers and promote the Quantum Universal Exchange (Q- 
UEL) language [4,5,14–29]. Rather, its appearance here is in large part 
because its use of Dirac notation in a rigorous way is particularly 
convenient for present purposes. Q-UEL was first envisaged as a proposal 
for the basis of a Thinking Web for medicine [4], and later as an archi
tectural principle. For that and other purposes, it is particularly conve
nient, though fortuitous, that Dirac notation somewhat resembles XML. 
The basic braket of Dirac Notation discussed in Theory Section 2, is, for 
example,  
< momentum(eV-sec/ Angstrom): = 0.2 | position(Agstrom): = 2.7 >
It is Q-UEL, but a physicist would immediately recognize it as 
essentially Dirac notation and understand it. It suffices for the moment 
to interpret the vertical bar ‘|’ as logical IF. The physicist would also 
understand that it ultimately implies probability values, not certainty. 
He or she would similarly understand at least the general sense of the 
following medical statement in Q-UEL, and that it somehow implied 
probabilities, not certainty. 
< ‘renal failure’:=Y | creatinine(mg/dL):=5.3 >
The general principles will be made clear in Section 2. Scientific and 
technical advantages of the Q-UEL language and associated mathematics 
and algorithms may be summarized into three main aspects as follows.  
(i) More Realistic and accurate Inference Nets. Q-UEL tags form the 
basis of a language for automated reasoning and directly provide 
the probabilistic building blocks for the Hyperbolic Dirac Net 
(HDN) [14,19,20,24,28]. An HDN may be described as analogous 
to a Bayes Net except that, very importantly, it may be based on a 
Bidirectional General Graph BGG, including cyclic paths, without 
iteration [28]. It is not confined, as is a Bayes Net, to the Directed 
Acyclic Graph or DAG [28]. It ensures property of consistency 
between probabilities including adherence to Bayes Rule called 
coherence [19,29], and minimizes the use of independency as
sumptions while allowing automatic construction very large 
inference nets [5]. Neglect of these considerations can lead to 
poor representations of reality and can be shown to have disas
trous consequences on accuracy [5,19,28,29]. In particular, the 
concept of d-separation and independence of parent nodes in the 
Bayes Net can be shown to give rise to large errors in probability 
because assumption of independency are made that clearly not 
need to have been made, and should not have been made, because 
they were not assumed elsewhere in the net [28,29]. For 
example, P(A|B,C) P(B|D)P(C|E) assumes independency between 
B and C in P(B|D)P(C|E), but relies upon interdependency in P(A| 
B,C).  
(ii) Probabilistic Semantics. The above relates primarily to conditional 
probabilities and analogous basic elements of Dirac notation 
where the relationship is simply conditional, implying logical IF 
or “given that”. However, the Dirac notation can also involve 
operators as described in theory Section 2 and this extended in 
the original basic Q-UEL, in a natural way, to the semantic triple 
subject-relationship-object. This forms the basis of a system of 
probabilistic semantics for automated reasoning. Hyperbolic Dirac 
nets may be built with relationship operators (such as verbs and 
prepositions) [30]. This includes use of metastatements in Q-UEL 
tag format to evolve the HDNs under the laws of categorical logic 
(including syllogisms), definitions, and grammatical and other 
linguistic rules [30]. Later, the probabilistic semantics approach 
was extended to the notion of an exam-taking “robot” capable of 
passing multiple choice medical licensing examinations by 
knowledge from human experts, structured data mining, and 
unstructured data mining of natural language text, including that 
obtained by automated surfing of the Internet [25,26].  
(iii) A Notation that Enables Interoperability. The original formulation 
emphasized interoperability between different formats and on
tologies, and between different treatments of probability in the 
Semantic Web [21–23], well-illustrated by epidemiological 
application with complex sources and the need to capture 
knowledge in a canonical form [27]. Perhaps most dramatically, 
as described in a series of six papers of which Ref [13] mentioned 
above was the second (see Ref. [10] for further discusssion), the 
above same kind of use of Q-UEL facilitated a very response to the 
appearance of the epidemic at a time when there were only two 
known deaths worldwide from what is now called COVID-19. 
A particular new feature not in XML is the use of Dirac’ vertical bar or 
pipe ‘|’ analogous to that in conditional probabilities such as P(A|B), and 
in constructions such as 
< subject expression | relationship expression | object expression >
Usually, the abbreviated general form <A| R | B> is used when 
discussing in the text these simpler kinds of Q-UEL tags. As in Dirac 
notation, R is an operator or operator expression. Q-UEL tags have 
algebraic and arithmetic force, and scalars, vectors, and matrices can be 
succinctly expressed and manipulated. In programming language mode, 
one can assign values, usually two probabilities called probability for
ward and probability backward, which are adjoint conditional proba
bilities, as a dual, as discussed in this paper: <A | R | B > = {x,y}. When 
generated by machine learning as data mining, transmitted via the 
Internet, or archived for long periods, the probabilities are carried in the 
tag via tag value attributes: <A Pfwd:=x |R |B Pbwd:=y >. For example, 
see Refs. [4,5]. However, the particular advantage of using Q-UEL in the 
present kind of paper is that, while the essential features of Dirac no
tation are intuitively obvious to physicists and mathematicians, the 
format for the attributes and the logical and other relations between 
them, used by physicists including Dirac himself, is somewhat variable 
and often used in a lax way. More rigor is needed from a mathematical 
and certainly from computational and particularly computational se
mantics perspective for use in AI. The account following closely follows 
Ref [29] but is required for completeness; see Ref. [29] for extended 
discussion. Q-UEL meets the need for rigor by use of attributes in formats 
called the Attribute Metadata Language (AML). There represent the ar
guments in logical expressions represented in the example tag 
<...|...|...> above. The attribute ‘Systolic blood pressure (mmHg)’:=140 
used earlier above is a simple example of the use of this standard. It 
exemplifies the use of the metadata operator ‘:=’ such that a more specific 
example or value of what lies on the left is placed on the right. Other 
examples are Smoker:=yes, or ’serum creatinine (mg/dL)’:=1.1, or ‘Blood 
urea nitrogen’:=high. Attributes can be arguments in logical expressions, 
of which logical AND is the default interpretation if logical operators are 
not specified. Q-UEL attributes can also have a more elaborate onto
logical structure than in XML, in effect ontological trees and graphs 
B. Robson and J. St. Clair                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Computers in Biology and Medicine 143 (2022) 105323
5
using the metadata operator as edges, e.g. as in (A:=(B:=C, D: = E:=F)), 
although in the present paper they are mostly simply of basic metadata:=
value form. The appearance or absence of single quotes and occasional 
appearance of double quotes has meaning in Q-UEL, but these are 
essentially to render their use unambiguous for a computer, and intui
tive interpretation on reading should be sufficient for present purposes. 
In general theoretical discussion as in almost of the present paper, the 
authors tend to use for example A:=a, where A is an example of a 
placeholder for the metadata name, and a is an example of a placeholder 
for its value, and even more often one may see only A, but in such a case 
A:=a or a more elaborate ontological structure form is to be understood 
and the principles of AML apply. 
1.6. An important example of relevance of quantum computing: Hacking 
primes 
Mathematically, machine learning (such as data mining, knowledge 
management, and inference from learned knowledge) can be expressed 
in the language and laws relating to prime numbers [31,32]. This 
immediately links proofs for the efficacy of QC in number-theoretic 
problems [33] to the AI domain, as follows. 
“Hacking primes” is a colloquial expressions for the factorization of 
composite natural numbers, commonly use in encryption, into their 
constituent prime numbers, a problem that can benefit hugely from QC 
ad discussed here. In that context, perhaps somewhat surprisingly, it is 
regard to the attributes that the most dramatic importance of QC for AI 
arises. It relates in large part to methods used to facilitate the data
mining of high dimensional data, ultimately a problem of informational 
entropy called the problem of “The Dragon on the Gold” [31]. However, 
it spreads more generally to many issues in medical information and 
knowledge management. 
In the internal operations of Q-UEL applications for such purposes, it 
is often convenient to represent each distinct attribute, however simple 
or elaborate its ontological structure, by a prime number, say, ΞA, ΞB, ΞC 
and so on. It is efficient that the more probable attribute to be encoun
tered in a data base has the lower prime numbers, but it is not essential. 
Algorithms based on this, and predating Q-UEL, were developed by the 
present author to facilitate a large variety of data management and 
analytic operations [32], to the extent that the present author has 
asserted that all descriptions and operations in data mining and data 
management ultimately relate to descriptions and operations in prime 
number theory [32]. A record like a medical record in spreadsheet-like, 
comma-separated value format is a composite number, a product of 
primes, and can be represented by e.g. a ket | ΞA, ΞB, ΞC, …> = | ΞA × ΞB 
× ΞC × … > such as | Ξrecord > for a record where Ξ is now also allowed 
to be a composite number, a product of primes from which the indi
vidual primes can be recovered by factorization. This use of the repre
sentation entity |…> called the ket is an essential feature of Dirac’s 
quantum mechanics and notation, also called the bra-ket, braket, or 
bracket notation as decribed above, and the ket appears throughout the 
present paper. However, the above paper predated Q-UEL because it was 
not understood how to render the ket’s complex value appropriately for 
application outside of QM, i.e. to the everyday world of human experi
ence and medicine. This is discussed in the present paper in terms of 
imaginary number h. A query over an entire set of such can be made by 
presenting the query as a prime or composite number and looking for 
exact integer division, i.e., division by the query that does not leave a 
remainder. 
Most importantly, associative data mining ideally needs to address 
every combination of attributes in each record read, and each combi
natoric result can be encoded by primes and products of primes (simi
larly represented a ket). For example, every combination such as (A), 
(B), (A, B), (A, C, G) (B, G, K W) is associated with a distinct natural 
number, most often a composite number as a product of primes. For a 
records of n attributes per record, there are precisely 2n−1 such sets 
expressed as kets, or simply 2n when including the empty collection and 
empty ket (if defined to allow that). More generally, as data types these 
are collections or “bags” not sets, since nothing in the approach prohibits 
that the same attribute can appear twice or more. As the present author 
demonstrated, these can be generated by considering the number- 
theoretic τ function. It involves division of the composite number 
describing a record, or any one of the above subsets, by 1, 2, 3, …up to 
the square root of the composite number (since one can determine the 
rest from the factorization up to that point). This identifies all 2N kets as 
combinations in the record, and in the sub-records as sub-sets or sub- 
collections, in order to count and ultimately evaluate associations. 
Although this and other related algorithms and applications [32] can 
be remarkably efficient, it remains that they often involve the above 
process which constitutes factorization, and as N becomes very large as 
more and more data describing patients has become available, they have 
become slow and discarded for other methods. This begs use of Shor’s 
QC algorithm [33] for rapid factorization. The problem can be reduced 
to one of finding the period r of a function f(x) = ax mod ν, where ν is for 
example Ξrecord and the composite number to be factorized, so that f(x) 
= f(x + r). A simple case is one in which r exactly divides the number of 
points ν = 2n over which f(x) is evaluated, i.e., ν/r = m for integer m. 
Although this algorithm is not examined in detail here and will be 
considered elsewhere, it requires operators (and for implementation the 
corresponding gates) which are known to be sufficient [6], and these are 
among the operators discussed here. This paper provides an introduc
tory basis for biomedical and healthcare researchers concerning the 
power of these operators. 
1.7. Other previous and related work 
Refs [34–37] describe some important steps in the historical back
ground to of probabilistic inference as the use of conditional probabil
ities based on counting observations (e.g., de Moivre [34,35]) or as 
analogous degrees of belief (Bayes, [36]). Chester’s primer of quantum 
mechanics [38] gives a good introductory account of how Dirac’s no
tation relates to observations. The work by Mullins et al. [39], possibly 
one of the first applications of data mining to large repositories of pa
tient records, illustrates how modern machine learning relates to con
ditional probabilities. The notion of observation that is fundamental to 
counting as the basis of probability in the frequentist (e.g. traditional 
Highschool, t-test, chi-squared) approach to data analytics, including 
structured data mining, is a double-edged sword in QC because, 
although it may be used to provide probabilities for input, and proba
bilities as results of computation can be output, observations and mea
surements of what is happening during computation will halt the core 
QC process [40–42]. Matters concerning the above aspects will be 
described in more detail as they appear in Sections 2 and 3. 
In approaching programming, programmers turn to paradigms, each 
choice of which provides a kind of conceptual map or a guideline on how 
best to view and tackle a computational problem. There are various 
possible models for QC, including the quantum circuit paradigm (which 
is the most appropriate to design of the basic chips), the quantum Turing 
machine, and the quantum random access machine (QRAM) [40]. Many 
quantum programming languages, which are developed using the 
QRAM model, and in addition to the considerations discussed here, it 
has become clear that one needs additional programming features to 
take quantum errors into account when modelling quantum computa
tional process [40]. At the time of writing, however, the degree of this 
error is being rapidly reduced by QC companies. The pioneering efforts 
in the theory for a practical QC are due to Bennet and collaborators, who 
established the traditional paradigm for quantum computing in terms of 
thermodynamics and related information theory, “Adiabatic Quantum 
Computation”, and reversibility [43–47]. Moret-Bonillo [48] has argued 
for the circuit model but believes that the essential paradigm is that, 
unlike classical computing, the quantum phenomenon gives the com
puter the ability to use simultaneously all the problem data. Conse
quently, he believes that the best applications of quantum computing in 
B. Robson and J. St. Clair                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Computers in Biology and Medicine 143 (2022) 105323
6
artificial intelligence will be found in the field of machine learning [48]. 
A more extreme idea extending that direction is that QC is itself the new 
paradigm, noting that that, “when carefully controlled, intrinsic char
acteristics of matter also present several new potential paradigms for 
engineering, in particular, for encoding, manipulating, and transferring 
information” [49]. As paradigms they do not seem to help too much 
about how to think more deeply about the fundamental relationships 
between QC and AI, what recipes to use, and how to use them to reason 
intimately with the quantum processes. In the present paper, the argu
ment is presented that the most useful picture for present purposes, and 
especially medical applications, is that QC appears as the innermost 
process described by a relationship operator R. In our paradigm, any R 
(or other operator at the above bra-operator-ket level of description) can 
itself be a core quantum circuit. Of particular interest are those opera
tors and gates that relate to the hyperbolic imaginary number h. What 
this means in general terms, is that the paradigm in the present paper is 
in large part one of probabilistic semantics. It is well represented in the 
Q-UEL language. 
2. Theory 
2.1. The conditional probability 
The following Sections underpin the mathematics of Dirac’s quan
tum mechanics and the Q-UEL language based on it, focusing on aspects 
of recognized or potential importance to quantum computing as devel
oped in Methods Section 2. They are not in themselves algorithms, 
though they provide the mathematics for the basis of several algorithms 
in Q-UEL applications. For how these algorithms and applications work 
together, seee associated discussion in Ref [29], and end of Results 
Section 4. For simple use of Q-UEL as a programming language in which 
to develop reasoning algorithms, see the version developed for medical 
students [30]. The role of Q-UEL in the following theoretical discussion, 
as in much of this paper, is simply to facilitate an introduction to Dirac’s 
QM by using Q-UEL’s intuitive notation, terminology, and jargon, and 
by following the spirit of Q-UEL by going back to and reexamining the 
basic principles of observation, counting, and probability. In Q-UEL, it is 
the conditional probability that is axiomatic. From that will be derived 
will be derived the notion of probability dual that is important in the 
Q-UEL language, and from that in turn, a quantum mechanical proba
bility amplitude, which is then generalized to be a quantity that can 
contain other imaginary numbers other than the square root of minus 
one. In the narrative of QM, probability is inherent (encoded) in the 
probability amplitude, often seen as a wave function. If resolved into a 
yes or no result of each possible outcome, that is considered in a pro
portion that is revealed by repeated observation and counting, i.e., 10 
yes divided by 20 yes or no [50–52]. In general, it is adequate to consider 
the system as having an unresolved classical phase space until an obser
vation takes place that contributes to the counting process. 
Classically, in data mining and data management in medicine as 
elsewhere, one is usually interested in observing and counting the 
occurrence of the kinds of combinations described above to determine 
probabilistic values such as probabilities, predictions odds, likelihood 
ratios, odds ratios, and association constants (e.g., Refs. [4,5]). Proba
bilities are usually considered the most fundamental although Whittle 
argued that expectation, essentially the average value of some physical 
quantity as it appears with a particular probability distribution, is 
axiomatic [53]. The account from hereon in this Section 2.1 and in 
Section 2.2 essentially follows Ref [29] but is required for completeness. 
As a starting point, one may consider a conditional probability due to 
very early workers such as de Moivre [ 34,35] in the 1700s.  
P(A|B) = P(A, B) / P(B) = n(A,B) / n(B), Lt n(B) →∞                         
(1) 
Here n(A,B) is the number observations of state A and B as a joint 
event, and n(B) the number of observations of state B. “State” in 
statistics extends to things, events, factors, descriptions, measurement 
values, and so on, the requirement being that they are observable and 
countable, and the notion that the calculated probability of a state is 
effectively independent of the previous calculated probabilities of that 
state in the same conditions for very large data. First formal descriptions 
of sampling of that kind are generally accredited to Laplace (1749-127) 
who, in activities such as estimating the population statistics of France, 
found, and emphasized, that the above notion is far from simple [54]. It 
is broadly agreed that (A|B) is more generally replaceable by a logical 
and/or relational expression for states A, B, C, etc., given that the cases 
(instances) in which that expression is true being countable, and one can 
retain the vertical bar ‘|’ as having the logical force of if. The advantage 
of taking the conditional form (as opposed to just, say, P(A) ) as 
axiomatic is that everything can be considered as conditional upon, or 
relative to, or related to, something; an explicit condition makes clear 
what it is, and significantly the Dirac recipe discussed latter below leads 
directly from probability amplitude to P(A|B) and P(B|A). In the Q-UEL 
notation, the more general kind of condition is denoted by a special 
Q-UEL attribute indicated by a question mark ‘?’. It is one of the several 
more generally useful features of Q-UEL notation. Amongst other ap
plications in Q-UEL, it is used to specify a complex valued probability as 
the HDN analogue of the self-probability in a Bayes Net. It has a physical 
interpretation: it relates directly to the event of preparation or observation 
of a state in QM [1,38,50,51] with a particular probability, e.g., of 
preparing or observing A as having a particular probability. Expressed in 
a classical probability context, the rules for use are seen to be simple, as 
follows. 
P(?) = P(?|?) = 1
P(A, ?) = P(?, A) = P(A),
P(?|A) = 1
P(A|?) = P(A)
(2) 
The prior probability P(A|?) then represents the probability of A 
prior to the measurement of A conditional upon B, and P(B|?) represents 
the probability of B prior to the measurement of B conditional upon A. 
As for P(B) in a Bayes Net, P(B|?) (and P(?|A) can be thought of as a prior 
probability. Frequently in QM, prior probabilities are portrayed as 
normalization constants. For example, in Chester’s pedagogic QM model 
of measuring the position of a bead on a circular wire of length L, P(A|?) 
would correspond to the normalizing factor of 1/√L [38]. In extension 
to calculations for clinical decision support etc., the probabilities can be 
determined empirically as was done by de Moivre and suggested by Eqn. 
(1), by counting observations. Today, in practice, this involves asso
ciative datamining [39]. 
2.2. Dual character of conditional probabilities 
It would have been tempting to start the above description of prob
ability in Section 2.1 by, for example, expressing the mapping between 
underlying probability amplitude, say Ψ, and observable probability P 
as, say, Ψ(A) → P(A). However, it is important for this review that this is 
usually not appropriate: it should in general be Ψ(A|B) → {P(A|B), P(B| 
A)}, where Ψ(A|B) is usually written in QM texts as ΨB(A) [38], and 
which may be explained as follows. It will be evident now why the 
conditional probability should be seen as axiomatic: P(A) has no such 
twin counterpart (except itself). P(A|B) and P(B|A) are said to be duals or 
adjoint forms of each other, and they are not in general of same proba
bility value. One cannot compute P(A|B) from P(B|A) or vice versa 
without other information, so it should be said that P(A|B) is the sym
bolic dual or symbolic adjoint of P(B|A), and vice versa. Because for many 
purposes a value of each of P(A|B) and P(B|A) must be assigned or 
calculated, the value of both jointly, considered as a single entity, can be 
specified by a numerical constant which is called a probability dual {P(A| 
B), P(B|A)}. In computations described in papers by author BR and 
collaborators, it is usually seen as a value such as {0.75, 0.92}, as the 
“constant” in an assignment expression, or as tag value attributes on 
B. Robson and J. St. Clair                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Computers in Biology and Medicine 143 (2022) 105323
7
Q-UEL’s XML-like tags (introduction Section 1.5). In classical proba
bility theory, relating the two probabilities requires Bayes’ Rule [36], 
which is simply an expression in probabilities directly derived from Eqn. 
(1). In symmetric form using the above notation, it is as follows.  
P(A|B)P(B|?) = P(B|A)P(A|?)                                                            
(3) 
Arguably, its true importance as proposed by Bayes is to make this a 
degree of belief [36], but this is not relevant in the present paper. 
Rather, the members of the dual are considered observable probabilities 
in the QM sense [1]. Within QM theory, the probability dual is calcu
lated ab initio from a physical quantity called the action, e.g. position 
times momentum [1,37]. One may think of the result of that as infor
mation I(A; B) = ln(K(A; B), with association constant K(A: B) defined as 
follows.  
K(A; B) = P(A|B)/P(A|?) = P(B|A)/P(B|?) = P(A,B) / P(A|?)P(B|?)        (4) 
Consequently, the observable probabilities are 
P(A|B) = P(A|?)K(A; B)
P(B|A) = P(B|?)K(A; B)
(5)  
2.3. Probability amplitudes and the Dirac bra-ket 
In QM, probability amplitudes are counterparts of probabilities in 
which the scalar real value can instead be scalar complex. For QM as it is 
usually encountered in i-complex wave mechanics, when using Dirac 
notation, the relation is a mapping that is not simple.  
<A|B> → {P(A|B), P(B|A)}                                                             
(6) 
Here the arrow above indicates the Dirac recipe for observable prob
abilities, here P(A|B) and P(B|A), which can be considered as a particular 
operation M called a measurement, often said to be irreversible as dis
cussed later below. Irreversibility is consistent with the idea that the 
reverse direction is degenerate because the probability amplitudes as 
complex numbers with the properties of ii = −1 can subtract from each 
other (negatively interfere) as well as add and reinforce each other. Here 
Dirac’s braket replaces Ψ(A|B) discussed above, the difference arguably 
being that we may think of Ψ(A|B) as the value of the probability 
amplitude, while the essence of the Dirac notation is that <A|B> is also 
an expression, formally a product of vectors bra <A| and ket |B>
described more fully next in Section 2.4. However, one could say that 
the more general definition of the braket and relationship between the 
braket and Ψ is the one favored by Bertlmann [55], also discussed in 
Section 2.4. 
Before proceeding with the appropriate description, a cautionary 
critique regarding commonly held views and some previous texts should 
be made here, for readers somewhat familiar with QM. Reference to 
excellent primers like Chester’s [38] is not always sufficient. This dis
cussion is required for extension of the mathematics and because QC 
obeys QM with no regard for human conventions.  
(i) Reference State. Chester states “Put what you know in the ket… 
You register the last measurement result - the one just made – in 
the ket. That is what you know about the system. The ket tells the 
condition of the system as an immediate measurement would 
reveal it to be” [38]. The so-called basis set is usually also a 
complete set of states is also described by a generalized ket, e.g. 
where he attribute is a variable describing position. In QC, 
regarding <A|B>, one cannot necessarily think of B as input or 
cause and A as subsequent result. As well as basing the braket on 
the Poisson bracket (an important consideration in classical 
Hamiltonian mechanics), Dirac was probably influenced by 
analogy to convention P(A|B) where the A is conditional on B 
and, in a causal interpretation, caused by it. However, the proba
bility amplitude relates to a probability dual, and it is a 
convention as to which ways around the conditional probabilities 
appear. In the early papers by author BR on the semantic impli
cations, it was inverted because of the categorical interpretation of 
P(B|A) that “All A are B”. While the ket part |B> is generally 
regarded as the reference state, that is a convention. It appears to 
have been an arbitrary choice for Dirac “… we can always set up a 
set of dual vectors, which mathematicians call the dual vectors. 
The procedure will be described for the case when the original 
vectors are ket vectors” [1]. Though he states that “each state of a 
dynamical system at a particular time corresponds to a ket vec
tor”, there seems nothing to have prohibited alternative choice of 
the bra except analogy to other, including conditional probabil
ity, conventions. Discussions below of symmetry, Hermitian 
character, reversibility in QC, and ket versus bra normalization, 
make more sense with that arbitrariness in mind.  
(ii) Event Reversal and Reciprocity Theorems. Following from the use of 
Dirac notation as below, and referring to A as position x and B as 
momentum p, Chester states that the probability density to-find- 
x-given-p is the same as that to-find-p-given-x, and writes his 
equation (2.18) as P(p|x) = P(x|p), adding that “It must be 
accepted as rule of nature that the reverse amplitude of an event 
is the complex conjugate of the forward amplitude for the event.” 
[38]. Chester calls this “the event reversal theorem” [38]. While 
the above statement is true as will be explained below, writing P 
(A|B) = P(B|A) would be at best be confusing or misleading for 
any general case, even in QM. For one thing, the above relates to 
A and B being p and x which are conjugate variables in that context 
[38]. “An event” seems to imply “any event” in the setting of 
Chester’s book, and probability amplitudes are not confined to 
conjugate variables. One can see how the idea of the above 
equality arises in the discussion following equation (56) of 
Chapter 3 in Dirac’s book [1], where the relevant theorem is the 
reciprocity theorem. But P(A|B) = P(B|A) as a result from QM 
ceases to be true in general, unless P(A|?) = P(B|?), by the 
application of the Dirac recipe for the mapping Ψ(A|B) → {P(A| 
B), P(B|A)}, involving a recipe called “ket normalization” of an 
entity with the value Ψ(A|B) and its complex conjugate Ψ(B|A). If 
it were not so, there would be little purpose in QM making use of 
the dual and the concept of dual vectors that underlies Dirac 
notation [2].  
(iii) Imaginary Numbers and the Born Rule. Surprisingly, one may also 
critique the standard view that “In quantum mechanics, a prob
ability amplitude is a complex number used in describing the 
behavior of systems. The modulus squared of this quantity rep
resents a probability density” as in the Wikipedia definition [56]. 
This principle due to Born [57] is not discarded, but for present 
purposes, one requires the proper and more general formulation 
of it in terms of complex conjugation as described later below, for 
the following reason. In the Wikipedia entry, the link to the 
webpage to “complex number” makes it clear that Wikipedia (and 
the usual view) means one based on i as the familiar square root 
of minus one. This is clearly the view taken in standard intro
ductory sources [6,38]. The statement regarding modulus 
squared underlines that interpretation because it is not true for 
every possible type of imaginary number, while other familiar 
principles hold by extension, and all imaginary numbers can use 
them to describe duals and dual vectors. In the trivial case of 
exception, it is well known a QM probability amplitude can be 
purely real (in the above notation, that would be so for Ψ (A|A) ). 
There is a tendency to think of anything other than real and 
i-complex Ψ as human interpretations that are to some extent 
fictitious, but if so they arguably are no less so than the real and 
i-complex wave function Ψ. Dirac refers a linear operator σ which 
can be seen as an imaginary number that squares to one [1], i.e. 
essentially the entity called h in the Introduction Section 1 above. 
Including that kind of imaginary number is an aspect of the 
B. Robson and J. St. Clair                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Computers in Biology and Medicine 143 (2022) 105323
8
process called dualization that can be applied to any wave func
tion (Section 2.8). Dirac regarded this as physical, with eigen
values “that do not vanish” [1]. Dirac also predicted the magnetic 
moment of the electron by demonstrating that the fuller treat
ment of the wave operator which can be expressed in terms of 
four distinct types of imaginary number γ0, γ1, γ2, and γ3 (asso
ciated with the derivatives of the wave function to time and three 
dimensions of space - see Section 24.6 in Penrose [52]). It would 
be an error to assume that this does not apply to, say, electrical 
phenomena in QC. The spin of an electron is axis-less and the 
magnetic quantum energy around it causes the moment of mag
netic field lines to generate magnetic moment. 
In general, it seems clear that a probability amplitude as a value can 
involve more than one kind of imaginary number. In the present context, 
a complex value c can be a value such as follows, which is the basis of 
mathematical entities such as quaternions, octonions and Musean 
numbers as discussed later below.  
c = a + b j1 + cj2 + dj3 + ….                                                          
(7) 
where a, b, c,.. are real numbers and j1, j2, etc are imaginary numbers. 
The appearance of several imaginary numbers is more a feature of 
advanced particle physics, but there are also counterparts as matrices in 
QC as discussed below. Importantly, not all imaginary numbers have the 
property of squaring to −1, though there are distinct imaginary numbers 
that do, which may be called flavors of i. In the cases of interest in the 
present paper the imaginary numbers are such that the absolute value of 
the square is | ji ji| = +1, and for products of different j there is the 
anticommutative property ji jj = - jj ji. See Penrose [52]. One importance 
of the above is that a complex number with a real and at least one 
imaginary part is sufficient to encode the probability dual. 
In principle, with an imaginary part associated with an imaginary 
number of some kind called j, one may conceive of a j-complex Hermitian 
commutator so that the bra-ket is generated as composed of the 
component conditional probabilities.  
<A|B> = ½ [P(A|B) + P(B|A)] + j ½ [P(A|B) – P(B|A)]                      
(8) 
In almost all the discussions of Dirac notation below, the Dirac no
tation can be shown to be applicable to probability amplitudes based on 
different imaginary numbers, and this is particularly so for j as h or i, or 
flavors of these. However, there are differences. The above expression is 
not particularly useful for applications of some kinds of complex number 
such as i with the ii = −1 property. It is arguably for this reason that 
physicists need the Dirac recipe to extract P(A|B) and P(B|A) [1] (see 
below), i.e. because of the particular properties of i-complex numbers. 
Also, because <A|B> is usually seen as derived from a product of vectors 
of as described below, so that conditional probabilities are seen as 
relating to |<A|B>|2, one would expect to see square roots of proba
bilities in some circumstances, and √½ rather than ½ in Eqn. (8). 
Nonetheless, as also discussed later below, these complications do not 
necessarily apply to probability amplitudes based on other kinds of 
imaginary numbers. Also as discussed shortly below, the more general 
interpretation of the Born rule used in the Dirac recipe [1] is required 
because of the different physical interpretation of an h-complex vector 
magnitude. However, Eqn. (8) is sufficient to introduce a general prin
ciple for all kinds of complex value: the bra-ket is no longer only a 
description of the conditional probabilities as symbolic adjoints. We can 
always directly derive the numerical value (probability amplitude) of 
<B|A> as the adjoint of <A|B>, and vice versa, by taking the complex 
conjugate.  
<A|B>* = <B|A>, <A|B> = <B|A>*                                             (9) 
Complex conjugation is indicated by the postscript operator *. It 
makes any imaginary part in an expression change sign, which is 
equivalent to considering that any imaginary number, say, j, is replaced 
by -j. It is this that relates to Chester’s statement that “It must be 
accepted as rule of nature that the reverse amplitude of an event is the 
complex conjugate of the forward amplitude for the event.” [38]. 
Eqn. (8) works for i in satisfying Eqn. (9), but the difficulty for i soon 
arises when going beyond self-operations and simple addition. In gen
eral, appropriate addition of i-complex bra-kets holds in expressions 
resulting in observable probabilities, but multiplication such as <B|C>
for i-complex bra-kets is readily shown to give an inappropriate result 
[14]. The proper approach involves the Dirac recipe as the transform 
<A|B> → {P(A|B), P(B|A)} (Eqn. (6)). It can be shown to work for most 
kinds of probability amplitude based on most kinds of imaginary num
ber, providing there is an important generalization. The final step of the 
Dirac recipe, is the Born Rule. Recall that this is often expressed as 
computing the probability as |<A|B>|2. In h-complex vector space, 
however, absolute magnitude and the required observable probability 
are not necessarily the same thing. The more general way to apply the 
Born rule is to multiply the complex number by its own complex 
conjugate:  
<A|B><A|B>* = <A|B><B|A>
(10) 
Without a first step preceding the above, however, expressions are 
obtained in which one cannot dissect out the separate values of P(A|B) 
and P(B|A), so a form of normalization is first required. Conceptually, 
this can be seen as experimentally fixing a value of B, say to produce <A| 
B>’ to obtain P(A|B) relative to it, called ket normalization, and sepa
rately experimentally fixing the value of A, say to produce ‘<A|B> to 
obtain P(B|A) relative to it, called bra normalization. Nonetheless, Dirac 
and most texts only speak of ket normalization because the ket is the 
conventional reference state and one can always first take the complex 
conjugate <A|B>* = <B|A> and form <B|A>’ from that. This all works 
equally well for i -complex probability amplitudes and for other kinds of 
complex numbers of interest here. 
2.4. The bra-ket as vector product 
Recall that “Whenever we have a set of vectors in any mathematical 
theory, we can always have a second set of vectors, which mathemati
cians call the dual vectors” [1]. In the case of QM, each these vectors as 
bra <A| and ket |B> are interpreted physically as a description as a state 
in a Hilbert space, that has dimensions of complex value. The above 
description in Section 2.3 is not a formal one though arguably it is at 
least a general one. Dirac’s insight was to treat the essential features 
analogous to a self-probability as a vectors called bra <A| and ket |B>, 
and to consider the bra-ket <A|B> as an inner product of these vectors, 
analogous to a dot product, <A|.|B>, yielding as required a scalar, most 
generally complex, value: <A|B> = <A| |B>. This should be distin
guished from the out product |A><B| which is a matrix, and from |A>| 
B> which is a vector as a tensor product in a different space, often 
simply generated as the product of each corresponding elements in turn. 
Just as with <A|B> that can be derived from a product such vectors as 
above, this state can also be considered as a probability amplitude that 
can sometimes be real (when all imaginary parts are zero), but usually 
complex in that at least one element is complex. The bra form <A| has a 
dual |B>, where the < | and | > delimiters indicate that one is the 
transpose T of the other, and <A| is usually considered as a row vector 
and |A> its corresponding ket vector, but it also implies its complex 
conjugate. In short, <A| = |A>*. One may think of this essence of the 
Dirac notation as an intuitive way of expressing the adjoint form of A as 
A† = AT* = A*T with A as a state vector. The Dirac notation has the 
convention discussed above that if |A> = A, then <A| = A* which, as 
also suggested by the universal use of ket normalization, indicates that 
the ket |…> is the reference form. Also, for the more general mathe
matical entity A, one should arguably sometimes more properly write 
<A| = A*T (but the bra and ket delimiters …| and |…> handle the 
transpose). Somewhat un-orthodoxically, we might think of the 
B. Robson and J. St. Clair                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Computers in Biology and Medicine 143 (2022) 105323
9
relationship rules between the bras and kets and their contents as <A| =
<|A†, |A> = A|> in which a null state <| or |> has some of the character 
of a unitary value or the identity operator I. 
Much of the above is standard (e.g. Refs. [1,38,52]) or a matter of 
taste and would seem beyond needing critique, but again there are issues 
relating to recent developments in the theory required for QC. The more 
general relationship between the braket and Ψ as a product of bra and 
ket is that <A|B> =
∫
dxΨ(A|x)Ψ(x|B), which is Bertlmann’s starting 
definition (e.g., Ref. [55]). In primer texts, such as Chester [38], that 
form appears later as a special case. The integration rather than sum
mation relates the idea that it is often better to think of the bra and ket as 
continuous functions rather than entities with discrete elements, and in 
some cases a discrete vector approach could be artificial. Conversely, 
familiar vectors with discrete elements would seem adequate and highly 
appropriate for electron spin and qubits. However, formulating Quan
tum Field Theory (QFT) so that it can be implemented on a quantum 
computer has recently become an active area of research for near-term 
QC and complicates the spin and qubit picture somewhat [58,59]. 
QFT is a field that arises from a combination of classical field theory, 
special relativity and quantum mechanics, and rests in part on the 
concept of a particular type of dualization due to Dirac that is important 
here and discussed later below. The above definition of the bracket by 
Bertlmann appears to be ultimately at the basis of his concern with the 
failure of a classical ideas about symmetry to survive processes of 
quantization, dualization, and regularization in QFT [55]. In this 
context, regularization is a method of modifying observables which have 
singularities to make them finite by introducing a parameter that models 
our lack of knowledge at unobserved scales, and like dualization, is a 
recent active part of QFT research for QC. 
There is an important consequence of the definition of bra and ket 
when an operator, usually expressible as a matrix, is placed between 
them, e.g. <A|R|B> and it shows up in taking the complex conjugate of 
the bra-operator-ket so formed. In Q-UEL texts R is usually used for the 
general name of an operator, indicating a relationship operator or relator 
in the semantic context. Note the use of bold font to indicate and 
distinguish an operator. An exception is made for certain scalar quan
tities such as coefficients c below which can play an operator-like role. If 
formality is required or a programming convention requires it, a scalar 
quantity can be multiplied by an identity operator I that leaves a vector 
unchanged, e.g. cI.  
(<A|R|B>)* ≡<A|R|B>* = <B|R†|A>
(11) 
The equivalence is by QM convention, simply so that the round 
brackets ( ) may be avoided, but in general the following is also 
convention as part of the definition of bra and ket. Reversibility prin
ciples require that if A and B are interchanged, the direction of action of 
R must be reversed, which is by taking the adjoint. However, recall that 
the postfix adjoint operator † = T* = *T. If R as a matrix is defined so that 
RT = R*, which means that the representative matrix is symmetrical 
around the main diagonal except that the elements above the diagonal 
are complex conjugates of those below the diagonal, then R† = R and the 
operator R is unchanged. Such an operator is called Hermitian. That is,  
(<A|R|B>)* ≡<A|R|B>* = <B|R|A> = <A|R*|B>
(12) 
This also applies if the matrix is simply symmetrical around the di
agonal and have no imaginary part on which complex conjugation can 
act, as applies to the identity operator I and certain projection operators. 
In which case one may speak of the operator and its matrix represen
tation as trivially Hermitian. 
2.5. Explicit representation of vectors 
The above are useful symbolic manipulations: one need only do 
arithmetic, and even traditional algebra, as a last step in calculation. In 
discussion of vectors and matrices below, a linear horizontal form such 
as [a, b, c, d] is used as is customary for the bra which is a row vector, but 
with the transpose operator T used to indicated a column vector: [a, b, c, 
d ]T such as a ket. Somewhat similarly, [a, b; c, d] is usually used to 
represent a 2 x 2 matrix (note the semicolon). This flat notation is 
convenient for keyboard input is used in Q-UEL applications and sup
porting documents, but importantly it also relates to, facilitates, certain 
useful notations described later in this paper, and gives clear definition 
for conversion of binary vectors and matrices (with binary 0/1 elements) 
to convenient decimal indices as also used later in this paper. For im
mediate present purposes, it is helpful and sufficient to define operations 
on vectors such as the inner product of a bra and ket analogous to the 
vector dot product of mathematics, using elements distinguished by 
indices such as in [a1, a2, a3, a4 …]. The essential nature of the explicit 
form of the vectors is clarified in terms of their role in forming their 
inner product, as follows.  
<A|B> = <A| |B> = [a1, a2, a3, a4 …] [b1, b2, b3, b4 …]T = Σi(ai × bi) (13) 
Note that we will often see ellipsis [a, b, c, d, …] or [a1, a2, a3, a4 …]. 
This is because bras and kets are in generally potentially indefinite, in 
the following sense. Although in many cases Dirac vectors and matrices 
of specific size, such as 2 elements and 2 × 2 elements, have physical 
meaning and relevance to quantum computing, physically meaningful 
vectors can sometimes be of indefinite number of elements and may 
even be continuous distributions without discrete elements, often 
adequately represented by functional forms. So, for example, summation 
operations involving vectors as in the formation products of bras and 
kets are replaced by integrals. Recall here the more general relationship 
between the braket and Ψ as a product of bra and ket is that <A|B> =
∫dxΨ(A|x)Ψ(x|B), which is Bertlmann’s starting definition (e.g., 
Ref. [55]). Unless there is a calculable functional form, however, a 
digital computer cannot store a represntation of a continuum, and un
fortunately there is no global rule as to the number of representative 
elements. In mathematics, the dot product or scalar product is an alge
braic operation that takes two equal length sequences of numbers and 
returns a single number. 
In the Q-UEL language in the programming mode that is being 
developed, a somewhat tensor-like approach that is especially useful for 
probability distributions there is no need to ensure that the number of 
discrete elements in each matches a priori. For example, for two vectors 
of 3 and 5 elements we can reproduce each element in the first m = 3 
times and in the second n = 6 times. We “stretched them thinly”, that is, 
by factors m/(mn) = 1/n and n/(mn) = 1/m respectively.  
[a, a, a, a, a, b, b, b, b, b, c, c, c, c, c ] x (3 / 15) . [e, e, e, f, f, f, g, g, g, h, h, h, i, i, 
i,]T x (5 / 15) = (ae + ae + ae + af + af + af + bg + bg + bg + bh + bh + bh 
+ ci + ci + ci]) / 15                                                                      
(14) 
Note the weight is (3/15) x (5/15) = 1/15. If we stretched them each 
say twice as much, we would have weighs (6/30) and (10/30) respec
tively we would obtain (60/900), but yielding the same result. A similar 
treatment can be applied to matrix rows and columns. To avoid 
continued increases in elements, a simple algorithm is thus applied after 
vector operations, such that if every element in the vector is followed by 
an element that has the same, then the second duplicate value is 
removed, so halving the number of elements. The process is repeated 
until it is not true that every element in the vector is followed by one of 
same value. 
Much of QM and certainly QC relates to elements of vectors that are 
binary, i.e. 0/1. In QM, the origin of this in the fundamental nature and 
importance of spin. Since QC is based on QM it is of course a dependent 
relationship. For a spin 1/2 particle, there are only two possible eigen
states of spin: spin up, and spin down. Spin up is denoted by X+ = [1, 0]T 
and spin down by X- = [0,1]T. The numbers other than binary arise 
because of superposition of states with different weights. However, 
vectors and matrices as operators that have discrete elements can be 
defined using bra-kets as elements because bra-kets represent scalar 
B. Robson and J. St. Clair                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Computers in Biology and Medicine 143 (2022) 105323
10
complex or scalar real numbers. The issue is that the bra-kets applied in 
reasoning can have algebraic and semantic meaning rather than simply 
ways of representing a number. Such meaningful bra-kets can be used to 
define bra-kets and bra-operator-kets, so the Dirac system is cyclically 
self-defining. The important issue that arises that one is not in general 
confined to envisaging states as all based on spin. An aspect of what is 
meant by “meaningful” above is that the overall vector product, anal
ogous to a dot product between vectors, implies products like <A|x><x| 
B> between the elements from <A| and from |B>. Because the notation 
<A| and |B> makes no mention of anything else that can be called x, 
arbitrarily or otherwise, this raises the question of what it is. Tradi
tionally in QM, it depends on a notion of an underlying universal 
quantum state as underlying entity < Ψ | = [ψ1, ψ2, ψ3, …]  
<A| = [<A| ψ1>, <A|ψ2>, <A|ψ3>, ….]                                        
(15)  
|B> = [<ψ1|B>, <ψ2|B>, <ψ3|B>, ….]T                                        
(16) 
In the everyday world of human experience, instead of thinking of Ψ, 
one may think instead of a common factor on which A and B, and all 
other states, strongly depend, e.g., clinical factors are dependent on age 
and gender, but unfortunately not exactly because the product of bra 
and ket is then only an estimate based on independency assumption that 
A and B are randomly associated. This independency is a notion that can 
be represented by considering a projection operator ? based on the 
preparation observation state ?  
<A|?><?|B> = <A| (|?><?|) B> = <A|?|B>
(17) 
If any process <A|x><x|B> were exact so that it resulted in <A|B>
as normally defined, one would be able to compute the probabilities of 
pairs (A, B) from the probability properties of each of A and B alone, 
which would save a great deal of computational resource. 
2.6. Unit vectors 
Prior to application of the Born rule [57], the step in the Dirac recipe 
of ket normalization of |B> to |B>’ to obtain P(A|B) formally involves 
the following.  
|B>’ = |B> / √<B|B>
(18) 
Here √<B|B> is often expressed as ||B||, called the norm of B. It has 
the force of an observation that prepares |B> or sets it as a reference 
point. Again, taking the complex conjugate of <A|B> and repeating on 
<B|A> with B replacing A in the above account will generate P(B|A). 
However, it is wise to keep in mind that the conventional use of the ket 
in QM as the reference form is an arbitrary convention of “direction” 
because the use of the above mathematics in a more general way allows 
inference nets to work backwards and forwards, allows tests of consis
tency between probability values called coherence (primarily meaning 
that Bayes’ Rule is obeyed), and proper quantum computing is neces
sarily reversible. A normalized vector such as |B>/√<B|B> has unit 
norm and is therefor called a unit vector, B’. By definition, a unit vector | 
B>/√<B|B> = [β1, β2, β3, …]T must satisfy the following  
|B>’ = Σi | βi|2                                                                              
(19) 
Normalized vectors such as <A|A> as products of <A| and |A>
satisfy <A|A> = 1. Use of Hermitian operators such as R = R† in <A|R| 
B> requires that <A| and |B> are orthogonal, i.e., <A|B> = 0, except in 
trivial cases such as identity matrix and a projection matrix. In Q-UEL, 
one says that A and B are mutually exclusive. It remains, however, that we 
say that <A|A> = 1. 
2.7. Weights (coefficients) of a ket 
Any ket such as |B> (and somewhat similarly a bra) in N-dimen
sional space (i.e. concerning a problem with N states etc. to consider) 
can be described by set of normalized vectors |i> distinguish by an index 
i = 1,2,3, …, each one associated with a dimension i and so orthogonal 
to each other, where complex numbers ci are called the components of 
the vector |B>. That is, one may write |B> = Σi ci |Ii>. Evidently, co
efficient ci is the weight of the contribution of each mutually orthogonal, 
normalized ket. In effect, any general vector can be considered a su
perposition of normalized states, as discussed later below. For 
completeness at this point it may be noted that for superposition as 
normally considered, the above equation will then typically take a form 
such as the following, in which C and D are in superposition to produce 
the “situation” that we see as B.  
|B> = c1 |C> + c2 |D> + …                                                         
(20) 
Because two vectors including say ci |Ii > are multiplied to give the 
bra-ket it is natural to consider that they are in some sense square roots 
of a bra-ket and of the final probability, which is the origin of the 
frequent appearance of square roots in QM. The weight as contribution 
of state |i> re-expressed as a probability is thus given by P(i) = | ci |2. If 
that is not so, it is normalized accordingly. Researchers are cautious 
about attaching a meaning to a single ket with a single coefficient, and it 
is the relative proportional value that matters. However, there is also an 
interpretation of a coefficient in terms of the action of an operator in 
general, say a relationship operator (relator) R. That is, R|B> = c|B>. 
What is meant here is that is a special set of kets called eigenkets all called 
|B> for which the above equality holds, also meaning that the operator 
then only rescales the ket by a scalar factor, and the coefficients ci 
associated with this special set are what is meant by the eigenvalues. 
Recall the important case of a Hermitian operator, <A| and |B> must be 
orthogonal, i.e. <A|B> = 0, except for trivial matrices such as identity 
matrix and a projection matrix. Importantly, ci must be real when an 
experimental observation R in <A| R |A> yields the expected value of a 
physical measurement. Similar comments to all above concerning kets 
also apply to bras, but note that  
<B| c* = (c|B>)*                                                                          (21) 
Consequently, where some authors write ci|B> as |ci B> or |B ci >, 
one should note that 
< B c| =< B|c*, |B >= c|B >
(22) 
If |B> is purely i-complex, it might be expected that the associated 
coefficient is also so, but that is not in general true, as follows. 
2.8. Dirac dualization, spinor projectors, and the importance of the 
hyperbolic imaginary number h 
Although an h-complex component to a probability amplitude might 
seem as an exotic add-on feature, that is not the case in Dirac’s extension 
of QM and the notation that he introduced to describe it. Every real or i- 
complex bra-ket, bra, ket, and matrix as operator has a hidden dual 
form. Dirac apparently attached great importance to this process called 
dualization because it appears early in his book [1], as his equation 23 in 
the second chapter, as follows,  
|P> = ½ (1+σ) |P> + ½ (1-σ) |P>
(23) 
That equation by itself appears enigmatic, since ½ (1+σ) + ½ (1-σ) =
1, and so, even though the result of operator times vector is not neces
sarily obvious, one would expect that the above becomes trivially |P> =
|P>, but Dirac taught that the two terms on the right here are eigenkets of 
σ, relating to the eigenvalues of σ as 1 and -1 respectively, “whence they 
do not vanish” [1]. Dualization is the basis of Quantum Field Theory, i.e. 
the a basis of particle physics and, in large part, the origin of the 
“standard model”. For that purpose, what makes the above non-trivial is 
that above decomposition symmetry can be broken by imagining 
interaction in an external field, for example as in the case when ½ (1+σ) 
and ½ (1-σ) are interpreted as spinor projectors ½ (1+ γ5) and ½ (1- γ5). 
B. Robson and J. St. Clair                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Computers in Biology and Medicine 143 (2022) 105323
11
Note that σ, γ5 and several other analogous entities or flavors such as 
γ0 (γtime), all share the hyperbolic property of the imaginary number h 
such that hh = +1, i.e. that that their square is +1. The present author 
writes the general basic spinor projector as ι = ½(1+h), whence its dual 
is ι* = ½(1-h). Using the multiplication rules of the Dirac notation and 
this notation, the above dualization of the ket (still prior to symmetry 
breaking) can be expressed as follows.  
<A|B> = ½ [P(A|B)+P(B|A)] + h ½ [P(A|B)-P(B|A)] = ι<A|B> + ι*<A|B>
(24) 
The spinor projectors ι = ½(1+h) and ι* = ½(1-h) have the following 
important properties that make proofs and calculations involving ιx and 
ι*y (where x and y are real numbers) easy: the idempotent property ιι ¼
ι, ι*ι* = ι*, the annihilation or nilpotent property ιι* = ι*ι = 0, and the 
normalization property ι+ι* = ι*+ι = 1. A consequence is that f{x, y} =
{f (x), f (y)} for most functions and operations of interest here and any 
real or i-complex numbers x and y. Note that {x, x} = x, a scalar real 
value, when x is real, or scalar i-complex if x is i-complex. So armed, one 
may readily perform, or write programs for, computations involving h- 
complex probability amplitudes. It is then easy to prove that ι<A|B> +
ι*<A|B> is equivalent to ιP(A|B) + ι*P(B|A) (that is not trivial) by the 
definitions given above, because of the idempotent and annihilation 
properties. However, if <A|B> is i-complex, ι<A|B> + ι*<A|B> is ul
timately hi-complex, and in any manipulation, note that ih = -hi. 
2.9. Matrix analogues of h 
Remarkably, imaginary numbers with the character of h already play 
hugely important, indeed key, roles in QC, but in the form of their matrix 
equivalents. In general, the action of any imaginary number can be 
represented by a matrix. For example, i as the familiar square root of 
minus one can be represented by matrix [0,-1; 1,0], and its square as the 
product of the matrix with itself is -I, the matrix [-1,0; 0,-1]. It is the 
negative form of the identity matrix I = [1,0; 0,1], the analogue of 1, 
such that -I is the analogue of −1. “Analogue” is somewhat misleading 
because one can legitimately write I|B> as 1|B> and -I|B> as −1|B>
since both give |B> and -|B> respectively in the usual interpretation. For 
example, Dirac saw σ, his counterpart of h, as a linear operator with 
eigenvalues 1 and -1, and nonetheless he wrote σσ = 1. It remains that 
one may more properly consider the matrix algebra counterpart of the 
expression hh = 1 to be, say, HH = I, where I is again the identity matrix. 
This is true of a number of matrices that are Hermitian and unitary, i.e. H 
= H† and HH† = I, so that the consequence is HH = I. Typically, then, 
one either writes expressions with imaginary numbers and algebraic 
operators, or with vector and matrix counterparts, and the two versions 
may be considered as the same thing in different languages. 
To discuss that, recall first that imaginary numbers can have various 
flavors that show up only when they are multiplied with each other, and 
with the important property that successive multiplications return the 
imaginary number to one in the original set of flavors. Notably, i has 
seven important flavors as shown in the multiplication table represented 
by Fig. 2. It is used in the more familiar i-complex octonion, where the 
flavors are often indicated by e. 
There are five matrices of particular interest here as having the same 
hyperbolic property hh = 1, which in traditional and current notations 
are as follows. 
H =
(
1/
̅̅
2
√)(
1
1
1
−1
)
=
(
1/
̅̅
2
√)
[1, 1; 1, −1]
(25)  
σx =
(
0
1
1
0
)
= [0, 1; 1, 0]
(26)  
σy =
(
0
−i
i
0
)
= [0, −i; i, 0]
(27)  
σx =
(
1
0
0
−1
)
= [1, 0; 0, −1]
(28)  
I =
(
1
0
0
1
)
= [1, 0; 0, 1]
(29) 
They all square to give identity matrix I, i.e., in the linear text no
tation [1,0; 0,1] used in Q-UEL, HH = I, σx σx = I, σy σy = I, σz σz ¼ I, 
and II = I. That format is not strictly Q-UEL and the standard keyboard 
font used there replaces σx, σy, and σz by X, Y, and Z, which also happens 
to be the standard notation used in QC for the corresponding important 
computer gates as discussed later below. Note that all the above with the 
exception of the identity matrix and matrix of zero elements can in be 
associated with the concept of spin of fermions such as the electron. The 
forms analogous to ½(1+h) and ½(1-h), say projection matrices ½(I + H) 
and ½(I–H), often written as ½(1+H) and ½(1-H), are examples of the 
spinor projectors introduced earlier above that instead had the idempotent 
property ιι = ι, ι*ι* = ι*. In Q-UEL publications, they are often identified 
specifically with spinor projectors ½ (1+ γ5) and ½ (1- γ5) well-known in 
particle physics, but this is not the universal form of a spinor projector in 
quantum field theory and hence particle physics. Other imaginary 
numbers or matrices with the hyperbolic property, such that the 
resulting expression has the idempotent property, may be seen. Used in 
the absence of other hyperbolic imaginary numbers and corresponding 
matrices, one can simply think of it as "the hyperbolic imaginary 
number". 
In QC, a gate with the character of H (Eqn. (25)) is the Hadamard 
gate, arguably the fundamental basis of quantum computing. As an 
important flavor of h, it is happily called H. Stated in brief, it is 
important because a particle needs to be brought into a superposition 
state, creating a working qubit, as discussed in more detail later below. 
However, an H gate does not always create superposition. It just rotates 
Fig. 2. Multiplication Table of Flavors of i (i-complex Octonion).  
B. Robson and J. St. Clair                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Computers in Biology and Medicine 143 (2022) 105323
12
all state vectors by 45◦, so when one has a state that is colinear to a 
component of the vector basis, and one measures it, this state vector 
always will collapse to the basis vector to which it is colinear, and so one 
measures this state with a probability of 1. Nonetheless, the Hadamard 
gate is also a well-known gate in quantum computing that is used to 
create superposition: it turns |0〉 into ½ (|0〉+|1) and |1〉 into |0〉 into ½ (| 
0〉+|1>. (26-28) the Pauli spin matrices, are in many respects simpler 
since they purely related to spin in directions x y and z, and that the 
square is the identity matrix is something that may be expected for a two 
half rotations. Eqn. (29), the identity matrix in same format, is the 
simplest and might be considered as the only trivial square root of i. 
The 4×4 Dirac gamma matrices are related, and γ0, and γ5 = i γ0 γ1 γ2 
γ3 which the present author often identifies with h because of its 
appearance in spinor projectors in physics often written ½ (1+ γ5), ½ (1- 
γ5). Both have γ0 and γ5 are Hermitian and unitary and so also have the 
idempotent property, e.g. γ5 γ5 = I. γ0 in Dirac’s mathematics is involved 
with time. The remaining matrices γ1, γ2 and γ3 are anti-Hermitian and 
involved with the three dimensions of space. However all can be 
considered as built from Pauli matrices and identity and all-zero 
matrices along with multipliers 1,-1, and i as a special kind of product 
discussed later below. For example, and importantly, γ0 = [I,0; 0,-I] and 
γ5 = [0,I; I,0]. 
Although the Hadamard operator H seems the most interesting of all 
matrices discussed here in the sense that it has the hyperbolic hh = 1 
property and can generate superposition of states, it is also arguable that 
the Pauli spin matrices are fundamental because all 2 × 2 matrices 
including H and I can be generated from them and I by a weighted sum 
with real or complex coefficients c, and all other n x n matrices of in
terest to quantum computing can be formed from (Kronecker) product 
which in quantum computing is the implementation of gates in parallel 
as discussed later below.  
G = c0 І + c1 σx + c1 σy + c2 σz                                                     
(30) 
There is an h-complex octonion analogous to the more familiar i- 
complex one in Fig. 2. This h-complex counterpart is shown in Fig. 3. It 
has been mentioned briefly in various Q-UEL publications because on 
the understanding that it potentially forms the basis of a higher order of 
logic that relates to the parsed structure of sentences. Since there are 
four non-trivial square roots of the identity matrix (i.e., excluding i), it is 
tempting to consider that formed by multiplying the three Pauli matrices 
by H one can generate three further of the seven required flavors of h, 
giving altogether σx, σy, σz, H, σu = Hσx, σv = Hσy, σw = H σz, seven 
imaginary numbers satisfying the multiplication table for flavors of h to 
produce the table in Fig. 3. 
As discussed in a somewhat different (j) notation in Section 2.4, most 
systems of multiplication of interest in physics that are not commutative 
(e.g. ab = ba) are anticommutative (e.g. ab = -ba) [52], while squares 
a2 etc. give some fundamental number such as 0, 1,or −1 (in particular, 
we here hoped for 1). This is not the case with the Pauli and Hadamard 
matrices. There are still interesting properties, as follows, that reflect a 
potentially useful algebraic system that clearly relates to an intriguing 
cyclic system of rotations and exotic logic system in an abstract sense, 
for example σx σy σz = −1, but it is not obviously directly related to the 
related to the h-complex octonion satisfying the multiplications of Fig. 3. 
σxσy = σyσx = iσz
σyσz = σzσy = iσx
σzσx = σxσz = iσz
σxH =
(
1/
̅̅
2
√)
=
(
1
−1
1
0
)
= Hσz
σyH =
(
1/
̅̅
2
√)
=
(
−i
i
i
i
)
= −Hσy
σzH =
(
1/
̅̅
2
√)
=
(
1
1
−1
1
)
= Hσx
(σxH)2 =
(
0
−1
1
−1
)
(Hσx)2 =
(
0
1
−1
0
)
= (σzH)2 = −(Hσz)2
( σyH
)2 = −I =
(
Hσy
)2
(31) 
The above are also of interest because a combined Musean super- 
table combining the i-complex and h-complex flavors is sometimes 
considered as representing or approaching a limit of complexity in 
algebra when it ceases to function with utility, but that is not entirely 
clear in the light of the above algebra. Some authors have stated that 
octonions are the limit before algebra breaks down, but those addressed 
were based on flavors of i, which are not the whole story. 
H, which can generate superposition, and its counterpart h relate to 
quantum computing as fundamentally as i. They make explicit the 
bidirectionality and reversibility of quantum computation (with the 
exception of the process of observation or measurement as discussed 
below). For immediate purposes, it is significant to note that, because of 
the above matrix definition, the dualization form is also expressible as 
follows, in which the spinor projectors can properly be seen as operators.  
|B> = ½ (I + H) |B> + ½ (I–H) |B>
(32) 
Here ½ (I + H) and ½ (I–H) are matrices that are analogues of ι and 
ι*, The form of the operator as the choice (√ ½) [1, 1; 1, −1] is the 
choice such that  
H = (√½) (|0>+|1>)|0> + (√½) (|0>−|1>)|1>
(33) 
H|0> = |+> and H|1> = |->, and states (√½) (|0>+|1>) = |+>
Fig. 3. Multiplication Table of Flavors of h (h-complex Octonion).  
B. Robson and J. St. Clair                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Computers in Biology and Medicine 143 (2022) 105323
13
and (√½) (|0>−|1>) = |- > relate to a popular polar basis in quantum 
computing. They are vectors that have analogy to spinor projectors ι and 
ι*, as do matrices ½ (I + H) and ½ (I–H). 
2.10. Exponential forms as the physical forms 
In QC, the wave state described in terms of i-complex functions is 
seen as the reality, not just as a mathematical perspective. Dirac also saw 
his linear operator σ, analogous to h, as no less physically real (his 
Chapter 2 and equation (23)) [1], but that is perhaps harder to see. In 
QM, the probabilities are derived ab intio by first computing a physical 
quantity called the action, such as position times momentum of a par
ticle, or energy times time. When these multiplied components are 
identified with A and B, they are conjugate variables, because the value of 
one determines the probability of the other classically, and only 
partially, subject to Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle, in QM. 
Expressed in units of Planck’s constant h, this action AB essentially be
comes mutual information I(A; B) = ln(P(A,B)/P(A)P(B)), so that in 
appropriate information units  
P(A) ej2π I(A;B) → P(A|B), P(B)ej2π I(A;B) → P(A|B)                             
(34) 
That is, in probability dual notation,  
{P(A), P(B)} ej2π I(A;B) → {P(A|B), P(B|A)}                                      
(35) 
In the case of j as i, such that ii = −1, one obtains a periodic, i.e., 
wave, function.  
e i2π I(A;B) = cos(2πI(A; B)) + i sin(2πI(A; B))                                   
(36) 
Because of the periodicity, i-complex state vectors are usually 
defined only up to a global phase that is typically considered not to be 
physically significant, πI(A; B) = I(A; B). In the case of j as h, a split- 
complex or hyperbolic number such that such that hh = +1, one ob
tains a hyperbolic function. We usually write as follows:  
eh I(A;B) = cosh(I(A; B) + h sinh(I(A; B)                                          
(37) 
There may be more than one imaginary number involved. For 
example, it is readily possible to show the following, albeit at first 
perhaps a counterintuitively simple result.  
e+hi I(A;B) = e-ih I(A;B) = cosh(I(A; B)) + hi sinh(I(A; B))                    
(38) 
Dirac rediscovered h though expressed it in different, often matrix, 
forms, and is the basis of Dirac dualization. Any bra-ket such as <A|B>
can be split into two components that coexist. For the above equation, 
that means that  
e+hi2π I(A;B) = e-ih2π I(A;B) = ι e+ i2π I(A;B) + ι* e-i2π I(A;B)                     
(39)  
2.11. Collapse of the wave function (state reduction) 
Matrices and potentially gates analogous to h are found in QC; they 
are also important in AI, and it is necessary to see why. In some sense, 
collapse of the wave function is a conceptual inverse of the action of the 
Hadamard gate and gates based on it that can generate superposition of 
states. However, the inverse relation is only conceptual for several 
reasons, and notably that the Hadamard operator and gate is reversible: 
recall HH = I. Collapse of the wave function or decoherence imply the 
action of a distinct operator, say M for measurement, which differs from 
all other quantum mechanical operators considered here because it 
often said irreversible (but see below). It is a state reduction operator R as 
envisaged by Penrose [52], but R is used in this paper to have a more 
general meaning concerning a relations between state descriptions. 
Depending on the system envisaged, however, some operation following 
such as HM is required to restore superposition, or it spontaneously 
develops after the measurement and the system is unobserved. In either 
case, the superposition of states “starts afresh”. 
The implications may be understood as follows. Superposition is in 
the fundamental nature of QM as wave mechanics that when one cannot 
see or impose intermediate events in a process, all apply in super
position. In the Feynman-Gibbs discussion of the Feynman path integral, 
parallel paths for a particle would give an overall probability related to 
|<A|B> + <B|C>|2 but forcing an observation of one path would yield 
|<A|B>|2 or |<B|C>|2. This is for the traditional i-complex case, when 
one is dealing with QM as wave mechanics. Similarly, in the i-complex 
case, an inference net <A|B><B|C> has a probability related to <A| 
B><B|C>(<A|B><B|C>)* following normalization by the Dirac recipe 
discussed above, which in that i-complex case can be expressed as |<A| 
B><B|C>|2. If, however, a measurement occurs involving B, this be
comes (<A|B><B|A>) (<B|C><C|B>), which in that i-complex case 
can be expressed as |<A|B>|2 |<B|C>|2. The latter is essentially the 
classical result. It is readily shown that one cannot take the product <A| 
B><B|C> using  
<A|B> → {P(A|B)P(B|C), P(C|B)P(B|A)} = {P(A|B), P(B|A} × {P(B|C), P(C| 
B)}                                                                                              
(40) 
To obtain probabilities when the bra-kets are i-complex, the more 
elaborate QM calculations for the final observable probabilities are 
required. But as indicated in the previous Section, one can do so easilly 
in the purely h-complex case. The notion that this depends on inter
rupting the overall inference process with an observation (measure
ment) can be understood as follows. 
The expression e+hi2π I(A;B) introduced in the preceding Section had 
conjugate symmetry, such that multiplication with its complex conju
gate gives 1. One imagines that this is perturbed into more interesting 
values by interaction with an external field, including an observation/ 
measurement. It is a process that is the physical counterpart of the Dirac 
recipe involving ket normalization. Another perspective based on Dir
ac’s idea of a linear operator σ with the σσ = +1 property is that h has 
eigenvalues −1 and +1, which means that the spinor projectors ι and ι* 
can each taken solutions as 0 or 1, or 1 or, 0, respectively, so we are 
moderately free to pick a physically meaningful eigensolution. As a more 
specific physical model of how collapse leads to physical behavior, 
consider that we start with the purely i-complex bra-ket that expresses 
Schrodinger’s purely wave mechanical description, and apply a Lorentz 
rotation i → h (in effect, replacing one imaginary number by the other) 
to obtain P(A) e−2π I(A;B). Prior to normalization, eh2πI(A;B) = ιe+2πI(A;B) +
ι*e−2πI(A;B). With appropriate normalization, allows us to consider the i- 
complex aspect responsible for wave character to vanish, along with the 
celebrated aspects of weirdness such as superposition of states, negative 
reinforcement, and nonlocality, though they do have classical ana
logues. The uncertainty principle based on the Planck constant h is in 
general replaced by standard deviation based on precision of measure
ment, but remains as dictating the consequences of the most precise 
measurement possible. For example, If I(A; B) expresses position x and 
momentum as mass m with velocity v, i.e. if, in standard information 
units, I(A; B) = 2πmv/h = 2πmx2/ht, then e−2π I(A;B) becomes a normal 
distribution in which observation of the position of the particle of mass 
m is located distance x or -x from a starting point after time t. Without 
measurement in the time t, i.e., without looking, it may be predicted to 
occur at a distance x from the starting point with a particular probability 
P given by the normal distribution. With longer periods t between each 
measurement, the standard deviation is greater, so the process has an 
interpretation in the classical everyday world of human experience as 
essentially diffusional 
The Lorentz rotation i → h can be regarded as a generalization of the 
widely used Wick rotation t → -i t in which time t in the action is 
replaced by so-called “imaginary time” -it. However, the latter would 
not appear to offer such an elegant explanation for collapse of the wave 
function, and in any event it does not lead to a very useful perspective 
B. Robson and J. St. Clair                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Computers in Biology and Medicine 143 (2022) 105323
14
and system of algebra based on h. Normal familiar everyday logic ap
plies after collapse of the wave function due to an observation (mea
surement), which is easy to demonstrate because the resulting so-called 
classical form can employ P(A|B) and P(B|A) as empirical probabilities. 
Classical logic including categorical and syllogistic logic, in probabilistic 
form, follows from the above. Re<A|B> (the real part of <A|B>) rep
resents an existential or “some” component, and Im<A|B> (the imagi
nary part) a universal or “all” component, to any statement. <A|B><B| 
C> is analogous to a simple syllogism that if all A are B, and all B are C, 
then all A are C, but all syllogisms and logical rules and definitions can 
be represented by other expressions built from bra-kets. As noted above, 
however, it is easy to show that this simplicity is not available for the 
more familiar i-complex bra-ket. Nonetheless, Feynman-like rotations 
are still possible in the h-complex case, generating the variety of syllo
gism forms in Fig. 4 (where symbol ~ is used as an abbreviation for not). 
The above logic extends to semantics, and enables a probabilistic 
semantics. A fuller approach to a richer probabilistic semantics for use in 
the everyday world of human experience relates to Dirac’s bra-operator- 
ket and also to the semantic triple. Recall also that any relationship can be 
employed if in actuality, or in principle, it can be represented by an 
operator and more specifically a matrix (which is usually a Hermitian 
one so that <A | R | B> = (<B| R | A>)* = <B | R* | A>). Here R* would 
correspond to, for example, active-passive inversion of a verb. The use of 
<A|, |B> as vectors and R as a matrix is important for representing 
probability distributions, but the ingenuity of the Dirac notation is that 
<A | R | B> etc. is an entity that can usually be adequately manipulated 
symbolically and implies two adjoint probabilities, and this is sufficient 
for the present paper. Also sufficient for most of the paper are the general 
conditional interpretation <A| B> = <A | if | B>, the categorical inter
pretation <A| B> = <B | are | A>, and (where appropriate) the causal 
interpretation < A|B> = <B| causes | A>, as well as relationships that 
can be related to these as far as counting and probability are concerned. 
Finally, a cautionary note should be added not to apply some con
cepts from different fields that make assumptions, usually about inde
pendence, that are often unwarranted. Assumptions of d-separation and 
independence of parent nodes in Bayes Nets has already been mentioned 
in Introduction Section 1.5. With h-complex bra-kets and/or bra- 
operator-kets as edges, we may form a probabilistic graph as an infer
ence net [19,20,28,30]. Unlike a Bayes’ Net which is confined to a 
Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG), it may be a Bidirectional General Graph 
(BGG). Consider a graph with two edges <A | f | B> and <B | g | C>
joined at node B. It cannot simply be said that this gives <A | h | C> as 
<A | fg | C> as category theory (re-expressed in the present notation) 
would require. This is because taking category theory at usual first 
impression would automatically treat A and C as independent. What we 
have here is that |B><B| form an outer product in Dirac notation, a 
projection matrix B = |B><B|, such that we obtain < A |f B g |C>. It 
remains that A and C are not directly dependent on each other. Inference 
nets are, in general, estimates when exact calculation is not possible 
because of data limitations. The estimates involve independency as
sumptions, notably that A and C are independent in the above example. 
We may conceive of a correction term for <B|X><X|B>, that is in <A | f 
| B><B|X><X|B><B | g | C>. Because <B|X> = <X|B>*, <B|X><X| 
B> can only be a real number, which simply rescales <A | f | B><B | g | 
C> and is not a general correction. However, if one avoids such use of a 
projection matrix by using, for example, <A | f | B><B|X><Y|B><B | g 
| C> with relator R = |X><Y| that is not a projection matrix, then 
correction is by a complex value. 
3. Methods: qubits and gates 
3.1. Bits and qubits 
For the foreseeable future, and from the Q-UEL perspective, the QC 
part of computation is likely to be confined to QC processes embedded in 
a much larger environment of classical and/or h-complex digital 
computation. Acting on h-complex values, the matrices that are realized 
as QC gates can serve to describe relationships R, as in <A|R|B> in that 
environment, while when realized as QC gates they define the operator 
expression that represents the basic code that is usefully executed as the 
Fig. 4. Relation of syllogisms to Feynman rotations.  
B. Robson and J. St. Clair                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Computers in Biology and Medicine 143 (2022) 105323
15
true QC program. Some notational aspects borrowed from Q-UEL are as 
follows. In machine coding in the classical digital computing case, it is 
often helpful to use a decimal notation for the state description which is 
the decimal value of a state. Also, PEEK and POKE are commands used in 
some high-level programming languages for accessing the contents of a 
specific memory cell referenced by its memory address specified in 
decimal. For the classical counterparts of qubits as bits, one might use s 
(0) for [0,0], s(1) for [0,1], s(2) for [1,0], and s(3) for [1,1] (this 
particular approach implies big-endian format which stores the most 
significant bytes first). Normalization and vectors of all zero elements 
(called null vectors) are discussed later below. This defines the names Q- 
UEL operators in this group, and this will help in discussion of quantum 
computation operators realized as gates which contain many binary 0/1 
elements as developed shortly below. However, it is of more limited 
value for states generated in quantum computing, understandable as i- 
complex values, on which the gates act. QM allows a weighted super
position of states, which might imply, for example, [0.62, 0.93]. 
As the basis, the classical case of bits 0/1 is still being discussed here 
first. In traditional digital computing, a bit as a classical unit of infor
mation can be considered, in the notation of Section 2.1, as confined to 
attributes b:=0 and b:=1, in which the only operations of identity 0 → 0, 
1 → 1 and negation 0 → 1, 1 → 0. Classically, within this two binary 
element description, one is confined to s(0) up to s(4), i.e. [0,0], [0,1], 
[1,0], [1,1]. The popular notation in quantum computing, even when 
discussing the basis in classical binary digits, is to use |0> and |1> such 
that |0> = [1,0]T and |1> = [0,1]T
. With the bra and ket we now can 
express this in current attribute notation as, for example,  
|b:=0 > = [1,0]T, |b:=1> = [0,1]T                                                   
(41) 
Following the above vector definitions for attributes b: = 1 and b: =
0, we obtain the following as the brackets as products.  
< b:=1| b:=1> = 1; < b:=0| b:=1> = 0; < b:=1| b:=0> = 0; < b:=0| 
b:=0> = 1                                                                                   
(42) 
Mapping the attribute value to the h-complex probability amplitude, 
recalling that {x,x} = x, a real value, one may define the following. 
< b: = 1 | identity | b: = 1 > = 1; < b: = 0 | identity | b: = 1 > = 0;
< b: = 1 | identity | b: = 0 > = 0; < b: = 0 | identity | b: = 0 > = 1
< b: = 1 | negation | b: = 1 > = 0; < b: = 0 | negation | b: = 1 > = 1
< b: = 1 | negation | b: = 0 > = 1; < b: = 0 | negation | b: = 0 > = 0
(43) 
So far, the above account is classical, and applicable to bits. Using the 
Hadamard gate discussed earlier above, we can obtain a superposition of 
binary states. In general, we might write the superposition as follows, 
the bits b becoming qubits q in the attributes.  
|q:= 0…1 > = α| b:= 0> + β|b:= 1>
(44) 
Measuring a single qubit (which as noted earlier above is often said 
to be irreversible, in which case it would not be a quantum gate oper
ation), when quantum state is represented by the vector, will result in | 
b: = 0> with probability |α|2, and in |b:=1> with probability |β|2. The 
coefficients α and β can be i-complex. If they start in a bit state such as 
[1,0], a Hadamard gate converts this to [½, ½], and a Pauli spin matrix Y 
will convert that to [-i, i]. 
The following describes the purely binary 0/1 2 x 2 operators, say in 
general G, extending the above s( ) notation, reading the binary from the 
convenient linear matrix format employed in Q-UEL applications. These 
can act on a single qubit [x,y] and be used as the building blocks of larger 
matrices. 
G(0) = [0,0;0,0];G(1) = [0,0;0,1];G(2) = [0,0;1,0];G(3) = [0,0;1,1];
G(4) = [0,1;0,0];G(5) = [0,1;0,1];G(6) = [0,1;1,0];G(7) = [0,1;1,1];
G(8) = [1,0;0,0];G(9) = [1,0;0,1];G(10) = [1,0;1,0];G(11) = [1,0;1,1]
G(12) = [1,1;0,0];G(13) = [1,1;0,1];G(14) = [1,1;1,0];G(15) = [1,1;1,1]
(45) 
In general we may define e.g. G(n), with an example for a sequential 
operation (a single channel in QC) as G(m)G(n). To reach the superpo
sitions state |q: = 0…1 > from binary vectors of only 0s and 1s, a su
perposition for all permissible values of α and β is allowed by means of 
the Hadamard gate H = (1/√2) [1, 1; 1, −1] introduced earlier above. 
This does not have a simple binary element form, though one can 
construct it as (1/√2) (G(1)-G(15)). After applying the Hadamard gate 
to a qubit that is in the |b:¼0> state, the qubit enters a new state where 
the probability of measuring 0 is (1/√2)2 = ½. Here the probability of 
measuring 0 is equal to the probability of measuring 1. 
3.2. Serial and parallel operations in computation networks 
Not all operations act on just one qubit as a 2-element vector. It is 
common practice to think of quantum computing in the manner of a 
quantum circuit. If one thinks of serially wired gates in a quantum cir
cuit, normal sequential matrix multiplication applies, e.g. XY, or in 
general, in the notation used above, G(m)G(n), so that the number of 
qubits and elements in the area that is output is the same as in input. 
There is a point to note when the product G(m)G(n) is not Hermitian, i.e. 
G(m)G(n) ∕= (G(m)G(n))† (even the product of two Hermitian matrices G 
(m) and G(n) is not necessarily Hermitian, i.e. if that is the case). 
Because the ket such as |B> as opposed to bra <B| is by convention seen 
as the state vector for B and the state that is prepared in most discus
sions, it sometimes becomes a bra when used in the desired algebraic 
sequence of processing. By that is meant that G(m)→G(n) acting on bra 
<B| is to be calculated as < B|G(n)G(m) = (<B|(G(n)) G(m). If one really 
means a ket, then by that is meant that G(m)→G(n) acting on say |B> is 
G(n)G(m)|B> = G(n) (G(m)|B>). Consequently, <A| G(n)G(m) |B> is 
what is meant in general. Section 3.4. gives an example that makes this 
clear. 
However, a quantum circuit is not usually a simple sequence but a 
kind of inference network, in general a Bidirectional General Graph 
(BGG). Channels in parallel imply a vector that is a concatenation of the 
vectors associated with each channel, and the number of 0/1 elements is 
the sum of the number in each channel. Defining say |Zero> = [0,0] and 
|One> = [1,1], will allow concatenation along with |b:=0 > and |b:=1 
> in a manner like that in assembly of a block matrix, e.g. [ |Zero>, | 
One>, |b: = 0> ], though normally these will be seen as variable with 
values determined by the channel state. The more general idea is that 
gates in parallel require the tensor (Kronecker) product of matrices 
which builds a general block matrix such that for example G(m) = [a1, 
a2; a3, a4], G(n) = [b1,b2; b3, b4] the product is [a1 G(n),a2 G(n); a3 G(n), 
a4 G(n)]. It is more general in the sense that used for identity matrices I 
one obtains an I with more elements, and if G(m) and G(n) are rein
terpreted simply as vectors, [a1G(n),a2 G(n)] applies. Stated explicitly,   
[a1G(n), a2Y; a3Y, a4Y]
= [a1[b1, b2; b3, b4]; a2[b1, b2; b3, b4]; a3[b1, b2; b3, b4], a4[b1, b2; b3, b4]]
= [a1b1, a1b2, a1b3, a1b4; a2b1, a2b2; a2b3, a2b4; a3b1, a3b2, a3b3, a3b4; a4b1, a4b2; a4b3, a4b4]
(46)   
B. Robson and J. St. Clair                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Computers in Biology and Medicine 143 (2022) 105323
16
To see how these operators are used in serial and parallel, recall the 
general form of the bra-operator-ket using Q-UEL: < subject expression | 
relationship expression | object expression>. The circuit interpretation is 
most easily understood as the relationship expression, because the cir
cuit can be identified as an operator, albeit potentially a very elaborate 
one. If G(j) and G(k) are in series, and G(l) and G(m) are in parallel, and 
G(n) is back in series with G(j) and G(k), then we may write 
<A| G(j) G(k) (G(l), G(m)) G(n) |B>
There are differences between the round bracket ( ) notation and the 
square bracket notation, but they may be mixed, e.g. any of all of G(j), G 
(k), G(l), G(m) could be replaced by an explicit description in the [ …, 
…; …, …] notation, if the matrices are 2 × 2 as above. However, note 
that the result of that operation is a 4 × 4 operation, so G(n) needs to be a 
4 × 4 matrix in this case. To make this clear, we can extend the G no
tation, seeing G(j), G(k), G(l), G(m) as the default meaning G2(j), G2(k), 
G2(l), G2(m) and G(n) as G4(n). 
<A| G2(j) G2(k) (G2(l), G2(m)) G4(n) |B>
It is required to be reversible for quantum computation. By 
“reversible” here is meant that there exists an adjoint form, which is in 
this case as follows. 
<B| G4(n)† (G2(m)†, G2(l)†) G2(k)† G2(j)† | A>
Although as stated above the focus is on i-complex expressions for 
the moment, the two above forms can be expressed as coexisting wave 
functions in a dualization, as an hi-complex probability amplitude. 
ι<A| G2(j) G2(k) (G2(l), G2(m)) G4(n) |B> + ι*<B| G4(n)† (G2(m)†, 
G2(l)†) G2(k)† G2(k)† | A>
Writing G2(j) G2(k) (G2(l), G2(m)) G4(n) as a single operator say R 
etc. we are concerned with a net work as a graph where A and B etc. are 
nodes and the edges composed of bra-operator-kets such as <A|R|B>. A 
simple serial example is <A|R|B><C|R|D>, and a branch point is 
exemplified by <A| R |B,C> (<B| S |D>, <B| S |D>). Typically, an HDN 
looks like a Bayes Net in which brackets and bra-operator-kets can 
replace conditional probabilities, but a Bidirectional General Graph, 
possibly including cycles (without iteration), is allowed [28]. Con
struction is slightly more complicated than for a Bayes Net as it makes 
far fewer assumptions concerning independencies. For rules of HDN 
network construction and the semantic significance of operators, see the 
bibliography of Q-UEL and HDN papers by the present author and col
laborators in the References, but particularly Refs [19,20,29,30]. 
3.3. Matrices commonly realized as gates in quantum computing 
In addition to the Hadamard gate H = (1/√2) [1,1; 1,-1] that gen
erates superposition of binary elements, commonly used gates in 
quantum computing that are as follows. The 2 × 2 operators that act on a 
single qubit in a channel are given first. Note that while the Pauli X 
matrix is G(6) and the remaining can be defined by algebraic expressions 
using the G( ) notation, there is no great advantage in this case. The Pauli 
matrices (traditionally used in QM for particle spin) are prominent, and 
have the property of squaring to the identity operator I.  
X = [0,1; 1,0] (Pauli-X); Y = [0,-i; i,0] (Pauli-Y); Z = [1,0; 0,-1] (Pauli-Z) (47) 
There is a special class of control gates are adjustable gates, where one 
or more qubits act as a control for some operation. They are possibly 
currently more important in the form of the larger Cphase gate matrix 
discussed below, which act on two cubits. The phase shift gate family of 
single-qubit gates map the basis states |0> → |0> and |1> → eiψ]|1>. 
The probability of measuring a |0> or |1> is unchanged after applying 
this gate, but it modifies the phase of the quantum state. P gates are as 
follows.  
P(ψ) = [1,0; 0, eiψ] (Phase shift gate)                                               
(48) 
Compare the phase gate S = [1,0,0,i] where the value of the i-com
plex element is fixed. There is a commonly used gate called T which is 
not a control gate because ψ is fixed as π/4.   
P(π/4) = T = [1,0; 0,eiπ/4]                                                              
(49) 
In fact, P gates move toward being universal 2 × 2 gates and building 
blocks for larger gates because the following could always be set to 
generate other gates.  
P(0) = I; P(π) = Z; P(π/2) = S = √Z; P(π/4) = T = √S = 4√Z       (50) 
There are other equivalences that can usefully be used in conjunc
tion, for example, H = X√Y and H = √YZ. The G( ) notation becomes 
more important because fairly concise expressions can be built from 
them combined with the above. Moreover, all the above act on a single 
qubit in a channel, and the above with G( ) notation can often express 
those in a simple way. To address those with more channels and hence 
more qubits, we can do so treating them as matrices with 2× 2 sub
matrices as blocks. As the common building blocks we may also use null 
operator O = G(0) = [0,0; 0,0], identity operator I = G(9) = [1,0; 0,1], 
Xnw = G(8) = [1,0; 0,0], Xsw = G(2) = [0,0; 1,0], Xne = G(4) = [0,1; 
0,0], Xse = G(1) = [0,0; 0,1]. Note that these are based on compass 
directions, that “place the 1”. Operations to transform the 2 × 2 matrices 
to higher dimensional matrices primarily involves seeing a new 2 × 2 
matrix in which each element is a 2 x 2 matrix, so operations related to 
tensor (Kronecker) product for gates in parallel may be used. They can 
also be represented as concatenation as follows, which described the 
commonly used gates that are usually literally hard-wired, but could be 
built in this way. C gates are as follows.  
Cnot = [I,O; O,X] (Controlled NOT)                                               
(51)  
Cz = [I,O; O,Z] (Swap)                                                                 
(52)  
Cphase = [I,O; O,P(ψ)] (C phase)                                                  
(53)  
Swap = [Xnw, Xsw; Xne, Xse ] (Controlled Z)                                 
(54)  
Toffoli = [I,O,O,O; O,I,O,O; O,O,1,O; O,O,O,X]                             
(55) 
Also commonly encountered are the Swap and Toffoli gates above. 
The Toffoli gate is a 3-bit (23 = 8 element) gate, which is universal for 
classical computation but not for quantum computation. The quantum 
Toffoli gate is the same gate as in the classical case, defined for 3 qubits. 
As the quantum analog of a classical gate, it is full defined by its truth 
table. It is universal when combined with the single qubit Hadamard 
gate. A set of universal quantum gates is any set of gates to which any 
operation possible on a quantum computer can be reduced, i.e., any 
other unitary operation can be expressed as a finite sequence of gates 
from the set. Technically, this is impossible with anything less than an 
uncountable set of gates since the number of possible quantum gates is 
uncountable, whereas the number of finite sequences from a finite set is 
countable. Fortunately, it is only required that any quantum operation 
can be approximated by a sequence of gates from this finite set. 
Quantum computing also recognizes the merits of sometimes using 
gates called rotation gates or rotators. For two-level systems such as 
qubits and spinors, the implied rotations have a period of 4π. A rotation 
of 2π returns the same state vector with a different phase. Unitary 
matrices can be written as a product of three rotators or less. However, 
rotators need not be viewed as fundamental building blocks because 
Pauli matrices are related to rotation generators, and rotation operators 
can be expressed as as matrix exponentials with Pauli matrices in the 
argument. 
3.4. Measurement matrices M 
The expectation value of an operator, say M, is the mean or average 
B. Robson and J. St. Clair                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Computers in Biology and Medicine 143 (2022) 105323
17
value of that operator with respect to a given quantum state. One is 
asking the following question from the wave function perspective: If a 
quantum state as a wave function |Ψ> is prepared many times |Ψ>|Ψ>
…, and one measures each a given operator MM … each time, what is 
the average over all the measurement results? That expectation value is 
<M> = < Ψ |M| Ψ>. Researchers often speak of the “average value of an 
operator”, because of the following. The above expectation < Ψ| M |Ψ>
is considered meaningful if R is Hermitian, and therefore it can be 
looked at in the following way, which does not require specific reference 
to Ψ for the core algebra because < Ψ| M |Ψ> is seen as a finer structure 
ΣM<M|A>’(<M|A>’)*. Here M is the value as state associated with an 
operator of observation M, and A is in the normalized vector state |A>’ 
= |A>/√<A|A> so that in the i-complex case (but not in general h- 
complex) <M|A>’(<M|A>’)* = |<M|A>|2. To relate state M to oper
ator M, the Hermitian M can be described using its eigenvalue decom
position M = ΣλPλ where {λ} are the distinct eigenvalues and in this case 
P is a projection matrix, i.e. each Pλ is a projector onto the corresponding 
eigenspaces. “Measuring an operator” would mean making a measure
ment using the basis {Pλ }. It also assigns a label of λ to an outcome from 
the projector Pλ which is a numerical value and one may obtain the 
expected value of it. From an initial state, which in wave function form 
would be |Ψ>, one obtains an answer λ with probability <Ψ|Pλ|Ψ>. The 
expected (average) value of interest is then Σλλ<Ψ|Pλ|Ψ>, which is <Ψ| 
M|Ψ>. 
A simple linear circuit involving a single qubit and called a phase flip 
circuit illustrates the simplest role of measurement by a measurement 
operator M. To cover the general case and consistent practice, one 
should not presume that it is involved in a Hermitian expression. It 
corresponds to the sequence of operations H→Z→H→M, which with the 
convention of progressive action on a ket would mean operator 
expression MHZH which has the reverse order. Recalling the Z gate, 
which maps 1 to −1, then applying it to an initialized qubit will leave the 
qubits computational state unchanged when measured. However, one 
applies a Hadamard gate H first then a Z-gate and then again a H gate it 
will flip the state of the qubit. Recall that applying H gate to a qubit it 
puts it in to a superposition of states such that when measured it could be 
|b:=0〉or |b:=1〉 with equal probability. The above gives the simple 
circuit HZH that combines with a measurement operator M. If the qubit 
is initialized to |b: = 0〉 and use the phase flip circuit above then gives | 
b:=1〉 when measured. Initializing to |b:=1gives |b:=0〉 instead. For 
example  
MHZH|b:=1> = M (HZH|b:=1>) = |b =0>
(56)  
<b:=0|MHZH|b:= 1> = <b:=0| b:=0> = 1                                    
(57) 
In general, quantum measurement can be described by a collection of 
operators {Mm}, called measurement operators where in this case any m is 
a possible measurement outcome in a spectrum of valid outcomes acting 
on wave function Ψ. The probability of the measurement is essentially as 
discussed above, but in present context for a specific measurement, m is 
as follows.  
P(m) = <Ψ| Mm
†Mm |Ψ>
(58) 
Normalization of the vector gives the post-measurement state as 
follows.  
| Mm >’ = Mm |Ψ> / √ <Ψ| Mm
†Mm |Ψ>
(59) 
The above does not give an impression of irreversibility. Tradition
ally, quantum measurements, and discussions concerning QC, have been 
associated with irreversible transformations, say due to an increase of 
entropy of pure states into mixtures, and ideas usually associated with 
von Neumann [41]. Several authors consider irreversibility hypothesis 
to be redundant [42]. For example, if a simple model is constructed in 
which the measuring process is described by a continuous unitary 
transformation of the state vector of the observed system and the 
apparatus, then final state is pure, but appears to be a mixture if degrees 
of freedom of the apparatus is ignored. Taking a Heisenberg-like 
perspective, the state vector |…> is fixed, and the dynamical variables 
are changed by the measurement [42]. It may be noted that a lack of 
reversibility for any M would seem to require that the commutator is 
non-zero.  
[M, M† ] = (MM† - M†M) ∕= 0                                                       
(60) 
To equal zero, one requirement is that the measurements do not 
interfere with each other. Compatible observables are said to be those 
for which their operators of observation commute, so that the commu
tator does equal zero. In contrast, they do interfere in the case of con
jugate variables such as position x and momentum p with operators of 
observation x and p, where [x,p] = ih/2π, the basis of the Heisenberg 
uncertainty principle that ΔxΔp ≥ih/4π. A measurement of an 
observable destroys a previous measurement on a state incompatible 
with it. 
As indicated above, all operators that represent physical observables 
are usually said to be Hermitian, but the above equations nonetheless 
indicate that a measurement operator per se need not be Hermitian, i.e. 
that M† = M need not be the case. Note also that one can still measure 
values of conjugate variables such as position and momentum subject to 
a degree of precision governed by the uncertainty principle ΔxΔp ≥ih/ 
4π as determined by the commutator. The requirement for any mea
surement operator M is not M† = M, but only that it satisfies 
completeness equations as a summation over the indices of the elements 
as follows.  
Σm Mm
†Mm = I                                                                            
(61) 
Note that the above is contraversial. Some interpretations say that no 
measurement can be undone, and that we simpy do not understand M in 
the Penrose sense [52]. There is also a position that what is meant is the 
application of an operator (MmMm
†) = I multiplied first, but that it is not 
decomposable, suggesting modification to the algebra. Another feature 
of completeness is Σm <Ψ| Mm
†Mm |Ψ> = 1. The above is, as given, 
consistent with M being a projective measurement, i.e., represented by a 
projection operator |a(m)><a(m)|. That is, Mm is the outer product for the 
same measurements state a(m). Compare the above Σm Mm
†Mm = I with 
the so-called von Neumann case that promotes a particular “collapse of 
the wave function” model [41], where the Mm are formulated as pro
jection operators such that Σm Mm
†Mm = |m>. For Eqn. (71), the spectral 
decomposition into the set of required values as the real-valued eigen
values means that it decomposes M into several projections into the 
eigenspace of M, multiplied by the eigenvalues m. When the system is 
described in terms of density operator ρ, the probability of getting the 
measurement result m is given by the trace Tr:  
P(m) = Tr(Mm
†Mm ρ)                                                                    
(62) 
This may be associated with the von Neumann entropy that increases 
in the irreversible model. It can as above be based on the trace Tr of the 
matrix, but is usually calculated as follows where again where λm are the 
eigenvalues the state vector.  
ΔS = Σm λm ln λm                                                                         
(63) 
After the measurement, the system will then be found in the 
following density state.  
Рf = Mm
†ρ Mm / Tr(Mm
†ρ Mm)                                                       
(64) 
The question arises as to what affect M has in <A| MHZH|B>. If the 
result of MHZH|B> is a vector such as a binary vector [0,1], M does not 
prohibit interpretation as a real or, more generally, h-complex value. 
Measurements are usually considered as inevitably real but could be 
considered h-complex, in the same sense as the probability dual {P(A|B), 
P(B|A)} with two real value solutions, each for an eigenvalue +1 or −1 
B. Robson and J. St. Clair                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Computers in Biology and Medicine 143 (2022) 105323
18
of h seen as linear operator. However, it is possible to set up an inference 
network of bra-kets or bra-operator-kets in which the i-complex char
acter can be propagated beyond the action of M, if required. The extent 
to which that is possible, when M is present as above, relates to the 
notorious “measurement problem”. QM provides probabilities for the 
different possible outcomes in an experiment, but not an explanation 
about how the observed result is obtained. It also relates to the problem 
l. 
Typically, it is assumed that irreversibility is because of information 
that is lost from the system and gained by the measurer, or at least loss of 
accessible information. Compare classical physics, where there is also 
always insufficient information to make a precise prediction but, in 
principle, that missing information could be found. In contrast, for QM, 
what one sees is all that is available. Suppose a state vector Σi = 1,2…n Ci| 
mi> is subjected to a measurement M. Then randomly, with a proba
bility |Ci|2, the apparatus measures a value mi and leaves the system in a 
single eigenstate of m, namely one of |mi > for a particular unpredict
able value of the index i. In other words, the researcher makes a mea
surement and collapses the description of n > 1 possible states to 1 state, 
and information ln(n) is gained by the measurer, and because the system 
becomes one described by n = 1, for a single index i, it loses information 
ln(n). An important distinction from the classical case is what we find for 
the system is what we do to the system and, classically, one does not 
consider the system as collapsing to the state we observe. The von 
Neuman approach [41] that relates to that consideration also considers 
that a measurement immediately after the preparation of a state finds it 
unchanged, which is in effect an identity operation and so reversible, 
albeit perhaps reversible in a trivial sense. That it is unchanged is 
certainly the case in many experiments (e.g., the measurement of spin in 
a Stern-Gerlach experiment). If the operation is not one of identity, then 
there is the need to consider two distinct kinds of information involved 
in the measurement. The first kind is information about the initial state 
of the system before the measurement. This is more important when 
which the quantum system is being used to communicate information 
from one person to another. Here the interest is more of the second kind, 
in information about the final state of the system. It is a record con
cerning how certain we are of the state of if the system following the 
measurement, which is the kind of information important when we are 
trying to control a system. One can in theory make the process reversible 
in any event, by reversing the measurement while keeping the record of 
the outcome just obtained. The set {Mm
†Mm} are commonly called 
positive operator valued (POV) measure elements. However, no infor
mation about the post-measurement state can be obtained from a POVM. 
This is not quite the same as the above record when often we are 
interested only in the outcome of the measurement, and not in the 
post-measurement state. The POVM formalism here proves to be helpful. 
If a qubit is prepared in one of two states: |b:=0> OR |b:=1>, i.e. in the 
state (|b:=0> + |b:=1>)/√2, then these two states are not mutually 
orthogonal. In effect, b:=0 and b:=1 are mutually exclusive so that is no 
projective measurement which can distinguish between them. However, 
it is possible to construct a POVM identifies the state in an error-free 
way, even though it sometimes gives an inconclusive result. A POVM 
is most useful when the observer is interested in the statistical properties 
of the quantum state that is sent, prior to processing (e.g., in quantum 
communications) rather than the outcome defined as the state after 
measurement. See Fig. 5 for the authors’ perspective based on the case 
when the outcome is of interest. 
Fig. 5 be clarified as follows. In the unitary view of complex quantum 
mechanics, distinct quantum states and overall probability and infor
mation are conserved. If the state of a quantum system is |Ψ>, then at a 
later time |Ψ> → U|Ψ>, where U = U† satisfies the Hermitian condition. 
Here unitary operator U will depend on the system specified and in
teractions with it, but not on |Ψ>, so the time evolution of quantum 
systems is linear. This is true at least for the i-complex case determined 
by the Schr¨odinger equation d|Ψ>/dt = −
i H(t)|Ψ > 2π/h, where the 
Hamiltonian H(t) relating to total energy at time t, satisfies the Hermi
tian condition. From that perspective, then for the wave function not to 
collapse requires that the quantum circuit as an operator expression, 
extended to include measurement and the writing of a record, is Her
mitian overall, but by the reading of the record by itself, not because it 
removes information from the unitary, i-complex system. In other 
words, a record of the system state may be kept with the realm embraced 
by unitarity, and overall probability and information will be conserved, 
but reading the record removes it and causes the wave function repre
sented by the smaller i-complex system to collapse. No conservation 
laws are broken, however, since the larger system including the reading 
of the record still contains all the information. One may envisage that 
the inner i-complex system is left alone, “to do its job”, until the user is 
ready. The practical complication is that the “race of quantum su
premacy” is in part a race to prevent external influences acting like an 
Fig. 5. Author view of effect of removing information from the record of system state by observation.  
B. Robson and J. St. Clair                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Computers in Biology and Medicine 143 (2022) 105323
19
observation until “the job is done”, and one cannot wait much longer 
after that. Consequently, these two considerations, getting the job done 
and extracting the information as soon as possible, may be a difficult 
balance requiring further practical development. The operator produc
ing the record can at least be considered as one that seeks to make a copy 
of the record of outcome and in principle of the character of an identity 
operator, so that one can consider it as embraced within M. So it would 
first appear is the operator that reads that record though that attempted 
copy is in practice a move of information from the record of outcome, 
making it appear irreversible within the larger system even if not seen as 
soon from outside the larger system. 
The choice of M itself is, however, a little more complicated. Recall 
that, in general, for a quantum measurement for the i-complex compo
nent, a measurement operator M is a chosen matrix that mathematically 
manipulates a state of the system. This manipulation involves extracting 
the experimental value from the attribute metadata:=value for vectors 
that are permissible discrete solutions, i.e. eigenvectors, with that spe
cific value, i.e., a real-valued eigenvalue, and in effect, uses it as the 
weight. For example, in chemical physics, if an electron in a system can 
be found in two states |x> and |-x>, where + x and -x are the two lo
cations of the electron on one or the other of two atoms, then the 
operator of measurement on x is [x,0; 0,-x], i.e.,   
The Linear Combination of Atomic Orbitals (LCAO) well known to 
theoretical and computational chemists is interesting because it leads to 
the chemical bond picture which is a superposition of states. The elec
tron density map, dependent on the distribution of probability of the 
electrons involved, provides a visual appreciation of superposition as, 
for example, the σ bond formed by the head-to-head overlap of s and p 
atomic orbitals along inter-nuclear axis, and π orbitals as second and 
third bonds resulting from the overlap of p orbitals, above and below (or 
in front and back of) the bonding axis. However, an M matrix more 
generally may differ from one type of measurement to another just as an 
experimental apparatus would be designed according to what physical 
property is to be measured. Thus, if the system were a single particle as 
above, the apparatus could also be designed to measure its energy, or its 
momentum or its spin, or in principle some other property. Nonetheless, 
cases in QC are more restricted, albeit that it could be dependent on the 
hardware basis. Similar to the location example, one may in a QC case 
similarly write |b:=0> = 0|b:=0> = 0, and |b:= 0> = 1|b:=0> = | 
b:=0>. In consequence, it is perhaps sometimes helpful to visualize the 
inner i-complex realm of Fig. 1 as a distribution of, typically, electrons 
on a QC chip as in some sense in “a molecular state”. It is thus possibly 
significant that molecular bonds can be disrupted in an external field by 
going to an anti-bonded state, analogous to a superposition |A>+|B>
being replaced by the equally valid solution |A> -|B>. Possibly also, 
however, one should best adopt a picture in which the inner i-complex 
realm of Fig. 6 is, as a phase space, a capsule of not just energy or 
probability in space, but a capsule of space-time in which energy and 
time, the product of which provides the important quantity of action, are 
both as yet not well individually well resolved, in accordance with the 
uncertainty principle. In QM, no distinction between cause and effect is 
made at the most fundamental level: time-symmetric systems can be 
viewed as causal or retro-causal. 
Finally, note that Dirac’s 4×4 matrix form for γ5 that can be written 
in the above notation as follows.  
G5 = γ5 = [O,I; I, O] = [G(0), G(9); G(9), G(0)]                             
(66)  
3.5. Vector-matrix computations using the purely h-complex bra-ket 
This Section closely follows the account of zipper matrices in 
Fig. 6. Interaction of Algorithms in the Current BioIngine implementation.  
Mx| | location: = +x > = +x | location: = +x > = [x, 0; 0, -x] | location: = +x >
Mx| | location: = −x > = −x | location: = −x > = [x, 0; 0, -x] | location: = −x >
(65)   
B. Robson and J. St. Clair                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Computers in Biology and Medicine 143 (2022) 105323
20
Ref. [27], for completeness. This is because, while many matrices and 
vectors in QC can be real valued probability amplitudes, they can be 
i-complex, but they also could be h-complex, or analogously treated as 
so by more complicated matrices and gates. Recall that it is easy to 
extract P(A|B) and P(B|A) in the h-complex case. However, vectors and 
matrices may, as indicated above, have h-complex elements and are 
hence describable as h-complex vectors and matrices. Although it was 
clear that the standard mathematics of QM is extensible to the purely 
h-complex case, the unfamiliar features benefit from a slightly different 
construction method. A further Q-UEL vector type called zipper vectors 
(ZV) is defined because while applying the above principles to achieve 
the following aims is possible, it is confusing. It remains trivial to 
interconvert them. ZVs facilitate semantic aspects and they are usually 
fixed as having 8 elements due to a perceived deep relation of semantic 
and logical structure with quaternions and octonions [94]. That is an 
issue beyond the scope of the present paper; the importance here is the 
relevance to linguistic structure, negation, random association, and 
distinguishability. As in QM, anything but the more trivial Q-UEL rela
tionship operators are non-trivially Hermitian, which requires that <A| 
and |B> are orthogonal such that <A|B> = 0. We wish to support this 
semantically, because < cats | dogs > interpreted categorically as < dogs 
| are | cats> = 0 means that dogs and cats are mutually exclusive, 
different things, but < dogs | chase | cats> ∕= 0. We can achieve this if [ 
{w, x}, {y, z} ] becomes [ {w, 0}, {0, x}, {y, 0}, {0, z} ] = [ιw, ι*x, ιy, 
ι*z]. This process is called dual decoupling. <A| and |B> now multiplied 
give zero, but <A| R | B> does not necessarily do so. R must however 
have a compatible form, an extension of the “toy” matrix in Ref. [1]. An 
example of such a zipper matrix is as follows. 
R =
[
0, ιx + ι*y, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0;
ιy + ι*x, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0;
0, 0, 0, ιx + ι*y, 0, 0, 0, 0;
0, 0, ιy + ι*x, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0;
0, 0, 0, 0, 0, ιx + ι*y, 0, 0;
0, 0, 0, 0, ιy + ι*x, 0, 0, 0;
0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, ιx + ι*y;
0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, ιy + ι*x, 0;
]
(67) 
The system is easier to use than an arbitrary class of h-complex 
vectors and matrices. Introducing two multipliers x and y, x ∕= y allows 
one to introduce asymmetries. Consider some quantum state A and an 
eigenvalue λ obtained as an experimental measurement. It is found that  
<A| λ ><A| λ>* = <A| λ >< λ |A> = ιP(A| λ)P(λ |A) + ι* P(A| λ)P(λ |A) =
P(A| λ)P(λ |A) = P(A |λ)P(λ |A) = P(A, λ)2/P(A)P(λ)                          
(68) 
Then if we retrospectively say that we prepared P(A) = 1, and ei
genvalues are independent, then P(A, λ)2/P(A) P(λ) = P(λ), P(A) → 1. In 
Q-UEL, ‘?’ again simply means an act of preparation or observation we 
are certain took place, even if what we normally observe is not certain, 
so that P(?) = 1, and <A|?> = {P(A), 1} and <?|B> = {1, P(B)}. If we 
prepare a quantum state such as A first, we can use Dirac algebra in a 
typical way to get the expected value of the measurement.  
<?| λ >< ? | λ >* = <?| λ >< λ |?> = <?| λ |?> = < λ > = <λ| ? ><?| λ > =
<λ| ? | λ >
(69) 
One may see ? as a trivially Hermitian matrix that joins two zipper 
vectors as <A | ? | B> as if they were <A|B> but not orthogonal. 
? = [X, O, O, O; O, X, O, O; O, O, X, O; O, O, O, X] =
[
0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0;
1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0;
0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0;
0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0;
0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0;
0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0;
0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1;
0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0;
]
(70) 
This simply “flips” (transposes) a zipper vector so that the relation
ship is no longer orthogonal. These considerations give us some insight 
into the deeper meaning of negation as a matter of degree of distin
guishability which may be important in AI applications [29]. 
4. Results and discussion 
4.1. General observations 
As noted in Introduction Section 1.2, there are no Results in the 
normal sense as this paper is primarily a review and, in any event, it is a 
theoretical paper. It is intended to help establish a theory particularly 
relevant to the interests of the author and collaborators for quantum 
computing QC in medicine, in both a classical computer sense, but now 
also in a quantum hardware sense. We have been able to show that AI 
technology based on the mathematics of Dirac’s quantum mechanics in 
particular regard to the hyperbolic imaginary number h, as described in 
a series of papers [4,5,14–30] fits in well with quantum computing, 
potentially allowing computationally intensive calculations with huge 
gains in efficiency. However, as an application for a further direction of 
study, some results that follow from the above are as follows. 
4.2. Resulting spinor projector forms for h-complex quantum computation 
A specific example what arises from the discussion so far addresses 
the following key question: can we carry out Dirac dualization and make 
use of the imaginary number h using QC gates in both the QC component 
of the calculation and in inference in the digital part of the system? Also, 
what would the essential features of the quantum circuits look like as 
matrix expressions and could we replace them by a single gate? Recall 
again Dirac’s enigmatic |P> = ½ (1+σ) |P> + ½ (1-σ) |P> (Eqn. (23)), 
and how the two multipliers were later related to spinor projectors. It 
needs to be the case that two gates with the properties of the spinor 
projectors, say Spp1and Spp0 as are used below, will deliver satisfy V =
Spp1V þ Spp1V for vectors V of interest. The most natural circuit 
feature with the character of a spinor projector can be constructed not 
from the Hadamard gate matrix but from Dirac’s 4x4 matrix form of γ5, 
on the grounds that this may be considered as “the usual spinor pro
jector” of particle physics. Recall that in present notation that as G5 =
[O, I; I,O]. Using Eqn. (24), one obtains  
Spp1 = ι = ½ (I + G5) = [½,0,½,0; 0,½,0,½; ½,0,½,0; ½,0,½,0]         (71)  
Spp0 = ι* = ½ (I - G5) = [½,0,-½,0; 0,½,0,-½; -½,0,½,0; 0,-½,0,½]     (72) 
The 1 in Spp1 and 0 in Spp0 reflects the (0,1) eigenvalue solutions 
for γ5 which in matrix form are reproduced by I and O. It is easy to show 
the required idempotent, annihilation and normalization projection 
properties are reproduced. 
B. Robson and J. St. Clair                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Computers in Biology and Medicine 143 (2022) 105323
21
(Spp1)2= Spp1; (Spp0)2 = Spp0
Spp1SppO = Spp0Spp1 = O
Spp1 + SppO = I
(73) 
None of G5, Spp1 and Spp0 correspond to any of the standard QC 
gates. However, G5 = [O, I; I,O] is a direct construction from the Pauli 
spin matrix σx = [0,1; 1,0].  
Spp1 = ι = ½ (I + σx) = [½,½; ½, ½ ]                                            
(74)  
Spp0 = ι* = ½ (I - σx) = [ ½,-½; -½,½]                                           
(75) 
It can be readily shown that this redefinition and Spp1 and Spp0 also 
satisfies the idempotent, annihilation, and normalization properties of 
Eqn. (24).  
Spp1 [½,½]T = Spp1 [1,0]T = Spp1 [0,1]T = [½,½]T                         
(76)  
Spp1 [0,0]T = Spp1 [1,0]T = Spp1 [0,1]T = [½,½]T                           
(77)  
Spp1 [1,1]T = [1,1]T                                                                      
(78)  
Spp1 [0.7,9.3]T = [5,5]T                                                                 
(79)  
Spp0 [½,½]T = [0,0]T                                                                    
(80)  
Spp0 [0,0]T = [0,0]T                                                                      
(81)  
Spp0 [1,0]T = [½,-½]T                                                                   
(82)  
Spp0 [0,1]T = [-½,½]T                                                                   
(83)  
Spp0 [1,1]T = [0,0]T                                                                      
(84)  
Spp0 [0.7,9.3]T = [-4.3,4.3]T                                                           
(85) 
This also demonstrates that while the above approach is arguably 
simpler than one based on the Hadamard matrix and gate, the spinor 
projector matrices, in certain cases such as Spp1 [0,1]T have the 
essential Hadamard property of converting a bit [0,1] to a “smeared” 
qubit state. In others a “smeared” or classical state can be reduced to 0. 
The spinor projector operators can of coure act of i-complex vectors. 
Note the following i-complex cases; Spp1 [-i, i] = [0,0], Spp1 [-i, i] =
[-i, i]. There now arises the question of whether these matrices allow 
Dirac dualization. Recall again Dirac’s enigmatic |P> = ½ (1+σ) |P> +
½ (1-σ) |P> (Eqn. (23)). It is required that the spinor projectors acting on 
the same vector yield the same result. This turns out to be the case. For 
example,  
Spp1 [½,½]T + Spp0 [½,½]T = [½,½]T                                            
(86)  
Spp1 [0,0]T + Spp0 [0,0]T = [0,0]T                                                 
(87)  
Spp1 [0,1]T + Spp0 [0,1]T = [0,1]T                                                 
(88)  
Spp1 [1,0]T + Spp0 [1,0]T = [1,0]T                                                 
(89)  
Spp1 [1,1]T + Spp0 [1,1]T = [1,1]T                                                 
(90)  
Spp1 [0.7,0.93]T + Spp0 [0.7,9.3]T = [0.7,9.3]T                                 
(91) 
Note that when these expressions act on a classical bit like [0,1] the 
resulting state vector is the same value and so classical, but acting on a 
“smeared” bit as qubit, as in [½,½]T the value remains the same and so 
quantum mechanical. Note that [1,1] will normally be considered as 
normalized to [½,½]. Some comment should therefore be made on the 
apparently unnormalizable [0, 0] null vector case. Recall the earlier 
example of i-complex cases; Spp1 [-i, i] T = [0,0] T, Spp0 [-i, i] T = [-i, i] 
T. It follows that Spp1 [-i, i] T + Spp0 [-i, i] T = [-i, i] T. Again, the 
required property is satisfied. 
The following calculation and sequence of gates (rightmost first) 
provides an example of a simple linear circuit.  
Spp1 Y H[1,0] T = [0, 0] T; Spp0 Y H[1,0] T = [-i, i] T;                     
(92) 
These essentially correspond to the realization of 0 eigenvalue of the 
0 and 1 eigenvalues of the spinor projectors corresponding to the −1 and 
+1 eigenvalues respectively of h. Here, a zero result is physically 
meaningful and makes sense. One cannot, however, normalize [0,0] if 
what is meant is division by 0+0. One can nonetheless have a proba
bility amplitude of zero, which implies a probability of zero. The com
plete picture in probability terms requires a final multiplication by a bra. 
Imagine ket |B> = [0,0] in <A|B>, whence one obtains <A| |B> = <A| 
B> = 0. This signifies that <A| and |B> are orthogonal to each other, 
which is, recall, a legal situation implying probability 0. 
The above completes, albeit largely by example, an audit system of 
principles so that Dirac’s quantum mechanics and the gates of quantum 
computing can provide all the essential features required for the kind of 
probabilistic semantics considered here. That includes the ability to 
compute the probability of a statement or set of statements in the 
manner indicated by the Q-UEL language [19–30]. All matrices 
considered here in depth are Hermitian, which is a property of verbs, 
prepositions and many other relationships in a language like English 
expressed in Q-UEL, and the majority like e.g., the Pauli Y gate, are 
non-trivially so, such that <A|R|B> = <B|R|A>* = <B|R*|A> where in 
linguistic terms, R* is the active-passive inverse. Some matrices are 
trivially Hermitian, meaning self-inverse, meaning that taking the 
transpose T, i.e., flipping the matrix around the major diagonal, makes 
no change. This applies to the important Hadamard H, SWAP, Pauli X 
and Z, and phase gate S, but also notably the spinor projector Spp1 and 
Spp2 gates. Several important matrices, including the Hadamard H and 
Pauli spin matrices X, Y, Z have the required h-imaginary property of 
squaring to the identity matrix I. In contrast, the spinor project matrices 
(and potential gates) Spp1 and Spp2 have the required idempotent, 
annihilation, and normalization properties to facilitate h-complex 
computation which is consistent with classical computation of proba
bilities and probabilistic semantics. Many computations can be made 
invertible [60], and in the case of an h-complex “expression”, that will 
mean computing the probability of the statement in which all subject 
and object “expressions” are interchanged. To invert a computation as a 
statement or set of statements, one must run the circuit in reverse with 
respect to the point of measurement M, with the inverse of each gate in 
place to achieve the transform [6,61]. Conversely, the matrices used to 
represent key quantum gates in the circuit model are important opera
tors for the further development of Q-UEL as a programming language 
for AI. 
4.3. Hyperbolic imaginary number h in the quantum computing context 
There appear to be two ways to think about the involvement of the 
hyperbolic imaginary number h.  
(1) The first is regarding the matrix counterparts of flavors of h 
represented in the gates in the QC hardware, albeit with some 
possibilities for their role in general computation. One could take 
the view that i-complex is mainly about vectors of state, and h- 
complex is mainly about gates and operations built of gates. All 
required matrices for gates can be derived from the Pauli 
matrices, Hadamard matrix, and identity matrix, although con
trol gates stand out as “adjustable matrices”. Conceptually, this 
leaves the wave function seen as i-complex (and sometimes real) 
component as the physical “object” on which to act. However, the 
distinction is artificial because from a generalized tenor 
perspective, the gates are matrices with elements that can in 
principle be real, i-complex, or h-complex (or indeed flavors of 
the latter).  
(2) Dirac dualization and the appearance of the less commonly 
known imaginary number h also adds an interesting perspective 
upon the above. One could take the view that h-complex is as 
physically "real" as is i-complex and is an aspect of the wave 
function and probability amplitude. When computation for 
B. Robson and J. St. Clair                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Computers in Biology and Medicine 143 (2022) 105323
22
analyses and predictions in the everyday world of human expe
rience makes use of a QM approach, including for use of AI in the 
practice of medicine, it must be, as author BR has argued, 
essentially an approach based on classical or h-complex QM (or 
some analogous calculation) to ensure that it will behave classi
cally and avoid the notorious bizarre predictions of QM. That 
would provide the main basis for the great majority of cases such 
as automated reasoning from machine learning and data mining 
where one is interested in decision support, prediction, and risk 
assessment. We would only be directly interested in harnessing 
the mathematics of i-complex QM in those cases where we need 
to reason about waves, for example as in neurology and cardi
ology and in algorithms for processing medical images, and 
representation of metabolic and epidemiological processes in 
terms of Fourier analysis and modeling. However, to gain great 
speed and make certain very important calculations practical in 
reasonable time, such as the crucial step of machine learning and 
high dimensional datamining of medical data that can exploit the 
Shor algorithm, i-complex computation on specialized QC hard
ware can be embedded in a “sea” of h-complex calculations on 
classical digital computing components, to enable superposition 
of states in the manner of an analogue computer making use of 
the dispersed wave function Ψ. In that case, a whole quantum 
computing circuit replaces the relationship operator of expres
sion R in Dirac’s bra-operator-ket <A|R|B> with an h-complex 
probability amplitude, and no less elaborate inference networks 
can be built from these elements. 
The more theoretical aspects by themselves also have applications in 
developing the mathematics of Artificial Intelligence. From the outset, 
Dirac notation has been used by physicists to introduce, develop, and 
formalize QC concepts, but a priori, one might take “broad use of Dirac 
notation” to mean to define a kind of circuit model seen as a Bidirec
tional General Graph BGG in which A, B, C, etc. are the nodes and bra- 
operator-kets such as <A|R|B> are the edges (arcs), <A|R|B, C> are 
examples of two-dimensional faces, and so on. For example, Q-UEL’s 
Hyperbolic Dirac Net (HDN) can potentially provide the QC methodol
ogy at the same rank level as the quantum circuit paradigm. This likely 
remains feasible as a “legal” approach, but in practice it emerges that the 
most useful picture for present purposes, and especially medical appli
cations, is that QC appears as the innermost process described by rela
tionship operator R. In this paradigm, any R (or other operator at the 
above bra-operator-ket level of description) is a quantum circuit. Recall 
that an important operation which would be part of the quantum circuit 
as operator expression R is called a “measurement”, say M, which is 
required to “restore normality”. That means (as described above), to 
collapse the wave function, which is also known as, or closely related to, 
decoherence and Penrose’s state reduction [52]. If not, the result will 
“span several bra-operator-kets”. The wave mechanical weirdness that is 
to be avoided is illustrated by the following: One does not want the 
patient predicted as alive and dead at the same time …. the FDA does not 
like that sort of thing. But one is interested in whether the patient is alive 
or dead in the future, and with what weight (relative probability). To say 
that M is needed, however, would be an interesting statement because 
the race for quantum supremacy has been in large part to prevent the 
wave function collapsing too soon, because environmental influences, 
with the same effect as M, abound. What is required is to control it so 
that it happens when needed and not before, and after the part of work is 
done that needs to be fast, e.g., the implementation of the Shor 
algorithm. 
4.4. Q-UEL and quantum computing languages 
The mathematics in Theory Section 2 also underlies Q-UEL and a 
reviewer was interested to see some discussion of Q-UEL as a “result” of 
that approach, in the context of better-known QC languages. Its uses and 
advantages have been described and referenced at several points in the 
text, especially in Introduction Section 1.5. Here some comparison of 
paradigms compared with more typical approaches may be made. Many 
languages for quantum computing have been developed, such as IBM’s 
Qiskit and quantum circuit approach and Microsoft’s Q# related to the C 
family of languages. Bernhard ¨Omer developed an elegant quantum 
computing language QCL [62,61], again essentially of the C program
ming language family, as are many others (he also reviews QC lan
guages). A simple quantum calculation (exemplifying true random 
number generation) in QCL is as follows [62,61]. 
procedure quRoulette() { qureg q [5]; int field; int number; input 
"Enter field number:",field; repeat { Mix(q); measure q,number; reset; } 
until number<=36; if field == number { print "Number",number,"You 
won!"; } else { print "Number",number,"You lose."; } } 
There are, however, necessarily underlying similarities with Q-UEL 
and other languages because one is typically dealing with the same 
underlying matrices and gates, e.g. the Cnot gate: 
qufunct parity(quconst x,quvoid y) { int i; for i = 0 to #x-1 { CNot(y,x 
[i]); } } 
Nonetheless, Q-UEL is in appearance very different, intended to 
blend intuitive linguistic/semantic features while remaining consistent 
with calculations using the Dirac notation, while being readable by a 
phsyician. It resembles Dirac notation as one would use it in calcula
tions. There have been several efforts to develop programming lan
guages on that basis, e.g., Ref. [63]. In comparisons to several such 
efforts, however, Q-UEL is conveniently based on a linear, keyboard 
character format for easy and speedy entry. Even the use of bold font to 
indicate operators is optional and confined to some output, or is simply 
just used in reporting as below, to enhance readability. In simplest useful 
applications, it is sufficiently simple, in its legitimate but simplest form, 
to be almost worthy of the description “children’s language”. In the 
development of the simplified POPPER form originally designed for 
training of Clinical Decision Support techniques for medical students 
[30], an example is  
< ‘chronic overeating’ | causes | obesity > = {0.9,0.8}                                
<obesity | causes | ‘type 2 diabetes’ > = {0.3,0.8}                                      
< ‘chronic overeating’ | causes | type 2 diabetes > = < ‘chronic overeating’ | 
causes | obesity > < obesity | causes | ‘type 2 diabetes’ >
The only mental leap is to understand that, for example, <obesity | 
causes | ‘type 2 diabetes’ > = {0.3,0.8} means P(“obesity causes type 2 
diabetes”) = 0.3 and P(“type 2 diabetes causes obesity”) = 0.8 (an 
assignment of probabilities which is, incidentally, believed to roughly 
correct, depending on country [19,30]). The h-complex value of the 
bra-operator ket is ½ [0.3 + 0.8]+ ½ h [0.3–0.8] = 0.55–0.5h. 
Computation of probabilities in the forward and reverse direction pro
ceeds in they above kind of way, extended to a network. In addition, 
metastatements or rules called “generalized twistors” by reference to 
Penrose twistors [52] as extension of the braket. They can act on the 
inference net so generated in order to evolve it under laws of syllogisms, 
higher order logic, definitions, vocabulary, grammar, and so on. A 
Q-UEL simple syllogistic style of form is as follows. 
<< $A | causes | $C> | ¼ | < $A | causes | $B>< $B | causes | 
$C>>
Alternatively, in the simple POPPER variant language, it is an 
assignment statement. 
< $A | causes | $C> = < $A | causes | $B>< $B | causes | $C>
This is also used to define other things such as the inverse from of a 
relationship R, i.e. the R*. 
< $B| ‘is caused by’ | $A> = < $A | causes | $B >
$A, $B, and $C are binding variables that that will transform any 
statement that satisfies certain simple binding rules, as the term is used 
in Expert Systems [64]. This will evolve an inference network [30]. The 
extended twistor form can also be assigned a transforming probability 
B. Robson and J. St. Clair                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Computers in Biology and Medicine 143 (2022) 105323
23
dual, but in this case the Q-UEL default of 1 for probabilities, odds, as
sociation constants, and similar measures is implied. The sense of use is 
similar to PROLOG [65], but is probabilistic. Various similar attempts at 
probabilistic PROLOG have been attempted [66] and satisfy formal re
quirements, but these approaches do not in general use Dirac notation. 
Note that the appearance of brakets and bra-operator-kets as both 
variables (as above) and expressions is intrinsic to the Dirac notation. 
<A | R | B> means also <A| times R times |B>. Vectors and matrices can 
also be defined in current developmental version Q-UEL, essentially as 
described in the present paper, e.g., <A| = [0,0.3; 0.3,0]. Hence a term 
such as < A | Cnot |B > has a value that can be computed from the Cnot 
matrix and gate, and <A| and |B>. Recall that all the main operators of 
Q-UEL are Hermitian, as are most of those in QC, so in most cases this is 
simply equivalent to assigning the value to elements to represent the 
required operator value as a probability density matrix. The primary 
difference is that Q-UEL has so far been largely concerned with an h- 
complex interpretation. Simply given a vector such as [½, ½] on which 
to act, it would see it as real, although it relates in interpretation, as it 
does in QC, to an i-complex wave function. 
Although focus has been on the mathematics in common with Q-UEL 
and QC, and detailed discussion of a system being implemented on 
Amazon Web Services is beyond present scope, a flow chart (Fig. 6) of 
how the algorithms fit together and this does raise some interesting 
comments that do put the above in perspective. This is reproduced from 
the most recent paper [29] in the same journal as the present review. All 
applications shown involve capturing knowledge in various ways as 
Q-UEL tags with a probability amplitude based on the probability dual, 
and so can be treated as h-complex. The default probability if probability 
is unknown is 1, for several important theoretical reasons extensively 
discussed in all the Q-UEL papers cited here. DiracMiner [24] is an 
unsupervised high-dimensional structured Big Data mining machine 
learning tool, and DiracSmash [5,29] is similar but focuses on gener
ating tags that can be used efficiently in odds inference nets as 
high-dimensional logistic regression, and partially supervised data 
mining. It can automatically build very large nets, once give a specifi
cation of variables likely to be interdependent with a target (such a renal 
failure) and each other, e.g., a patient’s health, and a subset of similar 
variables that are usually new symptoms or laboratory results, that are 
however, considered independent of each other (but interdependent 
with target and the interdependent variables) [5,29]. MARPLE is con
cerned with including Q-UEL tags from mining unstructured, natural 
language text, data, using XTRACTOR to autosurf the World Wide Web 
for related sites. The knowledge extracted is used to reason answers to 
questions and to rank by probability, and so answer, multiple choice 
questions [25,26]. The system learns with each investigation, and most 
tags generated are stored for future use in a large probabilistic knowl
edge base called the Knowledge Representation Store (KRS). They can be 
used to construct Hyperbolic Dirac Nets for inference using DiracBuilder 
[24], QuickPredict [29][], Marple [26] and POPPER [30]. All references 
to Q-UEL applications (modules) cited here [5,19–30] are shown in 
Fig. 6, and POPPER, one of the earlier algorithms, covers many of the 
semantic aspects already discussed above, such as use of metastatements 
to evolve an inference net [30]. Zipper matrices and advanced manip
ulation of vectors and matrices, including generalizations as tensor-like 
forms [27], still largely represent an experimental toolkit. 
5. Conclusions 
As stated throughout, this paper has been primarily intended to be a 
review, but with an unusual extension into the appearance of other 
imaginary numbers in the value of the probability amplitude, especially 
the hyperbolic or split-complex imaginary number h and its relatives. 
The topic has been touched in quantum mechanics, and quantum field 
theory, texts. Penrose appears to see a great deal of theoretical physics in 
terms of geometry and imaginary numbers and expresses much of Dir
ac’s work in that way [52]. 
In contrast, there is little relatively little mention of such topics in 
quantum computing texts although, as discussed above, several gate 
matrices have the hyperbolic imaginary number property, so that it can 
hardly be claimed that these algebraic entities have been entirely 
ignored, even if not seen from the present viewpoint. However, h and 
associated entities have gone under a litany of names in the past, making 
exhaustive review difficult [20]. During revision of this review, a 2008 
paper on the Cornell University arXiv server came to light [67] (arXiv is 
a free distribution service and an open-access archive). These authors, 
Gregoriˇc and Mankoˇc Borˇstnik, do not mention hyperbolic or split 
complex numbers, nor quaternions or octonions, nor Wick rotation, but 
used their Clifford algebra technique to represent quantum gates and 
quantum algorithms. They did not use the term "spinor projectors", but 
they did identify n-qubits with spinor representations for a system of n 
spinors. Representations are expressed in terms of products of projectors 
and nilpotents, and that does essentially mean with algebraic properties 
similar to those of spinor projectors discussed above in Section 4.2. 
Although they did not discuss all relevant matrices in such detail as here 
above, they proposed an algorithm for extracting a particular informa
tion out of a general superposition of 2n qubit states, and it provides a 
good example that supports the argument of the present review. It re
produces a particular choice of the initial state of Grover’s algorithm 
which is believed to be the fastest possible quantum algorithm for 
searching an unsorted database. We might make the assertion that this, 
at some deep level, relates to the number-theoretic considerations of 
Introduction Section 1.6, and the likely utility of Shor’s QC factorization 
algorithm in data mining and related processes. There is already known 
to be an important interplay between Shor’s and Grover’s algorithms, 
and their combined use in QC could pose a threat to blockchains [68]. 
However, they did not relate their work to AI or Dirac, and did not make 
use of, or propose, any QC language. They were not concerned with 
making any link to linguistics and probabilistic semantics. For Q-UEL, 
there is a natural mapping between the Dirac notation and natural 
language, especially noticeable in SOV (subject-verb-object) languages. 
The Q-UEL language described briefly here exploits that. The present 
paper indicates that probabilistic semantics is an appropriate paradigm 
for quantum computing and so it is a natural extension of quantum 
computing to AI. This is emphasized by the possibility of having an 
essentially h-complex (hyperbolic complex, split-complex) component 
including convenient spinor projector matrices that facilitate construc
tion of the equivalent of h-complex or partially h-complex probability 
amplitudes. The system of matrices required (and so in physical terms, 
gates required), appears to be complete, so enabling computation using 
the kind of AI as probabilistic semantics discussed here. 
Section 1.2 opened with the following questions: Is there an under
lying common theoretical structure of AI and quantum computing? 
Might they be unified into a single discipline? The conclusion we have 
from all the above considerations is yes, in both cases. It does appear, 
however, that it requires consideration of several kinds of imaginary 
number beyond the square root of minus one, and at very least the hy
perbolic or split-complex imaginary number. Not least, that is needed, as 
argued above, to extend quantum mechanics to the everyday classical 
world of human experience, including medicine. Addressing these issues 
always seems to open doors to interesting new considerations, raising 
further questions, so the system envisaged cannot yet be complete. It is 
hoped that advanced thinking by mathematicians and computer scien
tists will develop such ideas to open new areas in the mathematical and 
algorithmic principles required. 
Declaration of competing interest 
The Charter of The Dirac Foundation, Oxfordshire UK, is to promote 
the application of the thinking of Professor Paul. A. M. Dirac to human 
and veterinary medicine, so respecting the interests of his widow Mrs. 
Margit Dirac, and with her written permission for the foundation in a 
letter of 11th March 1995 to Dr. Barry Robson. The present series of 
B. Robson and J. St. Clair                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Computers in Biology and Medicine 143 (2022) 105323
24
papers openly declare ideas that arise from projects by the Foundation 
and its industrial and academic collaborators. Specific implementations 
and variants of the algorithms in this paper and others in industrially 
hardened form are being developed for both collaborative scientific and 
commercial purposes to serve industry. 
References 
[1] P.A.M. Dirac, Principles of Quantum Mechanics, forth ed., Oxford University Press, 
1967. 
[2] P.A.M. Dirac, A new notation for quantum mechanics, Math. Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc. 
35 (3) (1939) 416–418. 
[3] https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/1933/dirac/speech (last accessed 11/ 
27/2021). 
[4] B. Robson, U.G.J. Balis, T.P. Caruso, Suggestions for a web based universal 
exchange and inference language for medicine, Comput. Biol. Med. 1 (12) (2013) 
2297–2310, 43. 
[5] B. Robson, S. Boray, Studies in the extensively automatic construction of large 
odds-based inference networks from structured data. Examples from medical, 
bioinformatics, and health insurance claims data, Comput. Biol. Med. 95 (2018) 
147–166. 
[6] M. Nielsen, I.L. Chuang, Quantum Computation and Quantum Information, tenth 
ed., Cambridge University Press, 2010. 
[7] A. Trabesinger, Quantum simulation, Nat. Phys. 8 (2012) 263. 
[8] M. Schuld, F. Petruccione, Supervised Learning with Quantum Computers, 
Springer, 2018. 
[9] https://www.popsci.com/technology/ibm-eagle-127-qubit-quantum-chip/(last 
accessed 11/27/2001). 
[10] B. Robson, De novo protein folding on computers, Benefits and Challenges (2022) 
submitted for publication. 
[11] B. Robson, R.V. Fishleigh, C.A. Morrison, Prediction of HIV vaccine, Nature 4 
(1987) 325–395. 
[12] R.V. Fishleigh, B. Robson, R.P. Mee, Fragments of prion proteins, US Patent 5 
(1998), 773,572. 
[13] B. Robson, Computers and viral diseases. Preliminary bioinformatics studies on the 
design of a synthetic vaccine and a preventative peptidomimetic antagonist against 
the SARS-CoV-2 (2019-nCoV, COVID-19) coronavirus, Comput. Biol. Med. (2020) 
published online 26 February 2020, 103670, https://www.sciencedirect.com/sci 
ence/article/abs/pii/S0010482520300627. 
[14] B. Robson, The new physician as unwitting quantum mechanic: is adapting Dirac’s 
inference system best practice for personalized medicine, genomics and 
proteomics? J. Proteome Res. 6 (No. 8) (2007) 3114–3126. 
[15] B. Robson, Towards intelligent internet-roaming agents for mining and inference 
from medical data, in: Future of Health Technology Congress, Technology and 
Informatics, vol. 149, IOS Press, 2009, pp. 157–177. 
[16] B. Robson, Links between quantum physics and thought (A. I. Applications in 
medicine), in: Future of Health Technology Congress, Technology and Informatics, 
vol. 149, IOS Press, 2009, pp. 236–248. 
[17] B. Robson, Towards Automated Reasoning for Drug Discovery and Pharmaceutical 
Business Intelligence, Pharmaceutical Technology and Drug Research, 2012. 
[18] B. Robson, Towards new tools for pharmacoepidemiology, Adv. 
Pharmacoepidemiol. Drug Saf. 1 (2013) 6, https://doi.org/10.4172/2167- 
1052.100012. 
[19] B. Robson, Hyperbolic Dirac nets for medical decision support. Theory, methods, 
and comparison with Bayes nets, Comput. Biol. Med. 51 (2014) 183–197. 
[20] S. Deckelman, B. Robson, B. Split-Complex Numbers and Dirac Bra-Kets, 14, 
Communications in Information and Systems (CIS), 2015, pp. 135–149, 3. 
[21] B. Robson, U.G.J. Balis, , U. G. J., T.P. Caruso, Considerations, for a universal 
Exchange Language for healthcare, in: Proceedings of 2011 IEEE 13th International 
Conference on E-Health Networking, Applications and Services (Healthcom 2011), 
vols. 173–176, IEEE, Columbus, MO, 2011. 
[22] B. Robson, T.P. Caruso, in: C.U. Lehmann, E. Ammenwerth, C. Nohr (Eds.), 
A Universal Exchange Language for Healthcare MedInfo ’13: Proceedings of the 
14th World Congress on Medical and Health Informatics, IOS Press, Washington, 
DC, USA, 2013. Copenhagen, Denmark. 
[23] B. Robson, T.P. Caruso, U.G.J. Balis, Suggestions for a web based universal 
exchange and inference language for medicine. Continuity of patient care with 
PCAST disaggregation, Comput. Biol. Med. 56 (2014) 51–66. 
[24] B. Robson, S. Boray, Implementation of a web based universal exchange and 
inference language for medicine. Sparse data, probabilities and inference in data 
mining of clinical data repositories, Comput. Biol. Med. 66 (2015) 82–102. 
[25] B. Robson, S. Boray, Interesting things for computer systems to do: keeping and 
data mining millions of patient records, guiding patients and physicians, and 
passing medical licensing exams, Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM), in: 
Proceedings 2015 IEEE International Conference, vols. 1397–1404, IEEE, 2015. 
[26] B. Robson, S. Boray, Data-mining to build a knowledge representation store for 
clinical decision support. Studies on curation and validation based on machine 
performance in multiple choice medical licensing examinations, Comput. Biol. 
Med. 73 (2015) 71–93. 
[27] B. Robson, Studies in using a universal exchange and inference language for 
evidence based medicine. Semi-automated learning and reasoning for PICO 
methodology, systematic review, and environmental epidemiology, Comput. Biol. 
Med. 79 (2016) 299–323. 
[28] B. Robson, Bidirectional General Graphs for inference. Principles and implications 
for medicine, Comput. Biol. Med. 10 (2019) 382–399. 
[29] B. Robson, S. Boray, J. Weisman, Mining real-world high dimensional structured 
data in medicine and its use in decision support. Some different perspectives on 
unknowns, interdependency, and distinguishability, Comput. Biol. Med. 105118 
(2022). 
[30] B. Robson, POPPER, a simple programming language for probabilistic semantic 
inference in medicine, Comput. Biol. Med. 56 (2014) 107–123. 
[31] B. Robson, The dragon on the Gold: myths and realities for data mining in 
biotechnology using digital and molecular libraries, J. Proteome Res. 3 (6) (2004) 
1113–1119. 
[32] B. Robson, Clinical and pharmacogenomic data mining: 3. Zeta theory as a general 
tactic for clinical bioinformatics, J. Proteome Res. 4 (2) (2005) 445–455, 2005. 
[33] P.W. Shor, Algorithms for quantum computation: discrete logarithms and 
factoring, in: Proceedings 35th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer 
Science, IEEE Computer Society. Press, 1994, pp. 124–134. 
[34] A. de Moivre, Annuities upon Lives: or, the Valuation of Annuities upon Any 
Number of Lives; as Also, of Reversions, W.P. and Francis Fayram, London, 1725. 
[35] A. de Moivre, The Doctrine of Chance. A Method of Calculating the Probability of 
Events in Play, second ed., H. Woodfall, London, 1738. 
[36] T. Bayes, An essay towards solving a problem in the doctrine of chances, Phil. 
Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond. 53 (370) (1763) 41. 
[37] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems, Morgan Kaufmann, San 
Mateo, 1988. 
[38] M. Chester, Primer of Quantum Mechanics, John Wiley and Sons, 1987. 
[39] I.M. Mullins, I.M.M.S. Siadaty, J. Lyman, K. Scully, K.G.T. Garrett, G. Miller, 
R. Muller, B. Robson, C. Apte, C.S. Weiss, I. Rigoutsos, D. Platt, S. Cohen, Data 
mining and clinical data repositories: insights from a 667,000 patient data set, 
Comput. Biol. Med. 36 (12) (2006) 1351–1377. 
[40] J.I.A. Miszcak, Models of quantum computation and quantum programming 
languages, arXiv:1012.6035v2 [cs.PL] (3 Dec), https://1012.6035.pdf, 2011 
(arxiv.org). 
[41] J. Bub, Von neumann’s theory of quantum measurement, in: M. R´edei, M. St¨oltzner 
(Eds.), John von Neumann and the Foundations of Quantum Physics. Vienna Circle 
Institute Yearbook [2000], vol. 8, Springer, 2001. 
[42] A. Peres, Quantum measurements are reversible, Am. J. Phys. 42 (1974) 886. 
[43] C.H. Bennett, Logical reversibility of computation, IBM J. Res. Dev. 17 (1973) 
525–532. 
[44] C.H. Bennett, The thermodynamics of computation: a review, Int. J. Theor. Phys. 
21 (1982) 905–940. 
[45] C.H. Bennett, R. Landauer, Fundamental physical limits of computation, Sci. Am. 
253 (1985) 48–56. 
[46] C.H. Bennett, P.W. Shir, Quantum information theory, IEEE Trans. Inf. Theor. 44 
(1998) 2724–2742. 
[47] C.H. Bennett, D.P. Divincenzo, Quantum information and computation, Nature 404 
(2000) 247–255. 
[48] V. Moret-Bonillo, Can artificial intelligence benefit from quantum computing? 
Progress in Artificial Intelligence (2014) https://doi.org/10.1007/s13748-014- 
0059-0. 
[49] E. Grumbling, M. Horowitz (Eds.), Quantum Computing: A New Paradigm, Chapter 
2 in Quantum Computing, Progress and ProspectsNational Acadamies Press, 2019. 
[50] L. Susskind, A. Friedman, Quantum Mechanics the Theoretical Minimum, Allen 
Lane (Penguin), 2014. 
[51] H. Everett, Relative state formulation of quantum mechanics, Rev. Mod. Phys. 29 
(3) (1957) 454–462. 
[52] R. Penrose, The Road to Reality: A Complete Guide to the Laws of the 
UniverseJonathan Cape, 2013. 
[53] P. Whittle, Probabilty, Penguin Books, 1970. 
[54] A.M. Clerke, Laplace, pierre simon, in: eleventh ed., in: H. Chisholm (Ed.), 
Encyclopaedia Britannica, vol. 16, Cambridge University Press, 1911, pp. 200–202, 
200-202. 
[55] R.A. Bertlmann, Anomalies in Quantum Field Theory, Clarendon Press, 1996. 
[56] Wikipedia, Probability amplitude, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Probability_ 
amplitude (last accessed 24th January 2022).. 
[57] Wikipedia, Born Rule, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Born_rule, (last accessed 
25th January 2022). 
[58] T. Bhattacharya, A.J. Buser, S. Chandrasekharan, R. Gupta, H. Singh, Qubit 
Regularization of Asymptotic Freedom, Phys. Rev. Lett. 126 (2021) 172001. 
[59] F. Bruckmann, J.D. Urbina, Rigorous Construction of Coherent State Path Integrals 
through Dualization, Cornell university ArXiv.org, 2018, p. 10462, 1807. 
[60] J. Shor and P. Shor. Quantum Computing (CST Part II) Lecture 9: Quantum Fourier 
Transform & Quantum Phase Estimation, Cabridge University, https://www.cl. 
cam.ac.uk/teaching/1920/QuantComp/Quantum_Computing_Lecture_9.pdf, (last 
accessed 28th January, 2022). 
[61] ¨Omer, B. QCL - a programming language for quantum computers, http://tph.tuw 
ien.ac.at/~oemer/qcl.html,(last accessed 28th January 2022). 
[62] B. ¨Omer, Master’s Thesis, A Procedural Formalism for Quantum Computing, 
Technical University of Vienna, 1998. 
[63] J.L. G´omez Mu˜noz, F. Delgado, QUANTUM: a wolfram mathematica add-on for 
Dirac bra-ket notation, non-commutative algebra, and simulation of quantum 
computing circuits, J. Phys. Conf. 698 (2016), 012019. 
[64] K. Parsaye, M. Chignell, Expert Systems for Experts, John Wiley and Sons, 1988. 
[65] C.S. Mellish, W.F. Clocksin, Programming in Prolog: Using the Iso Standard, 
Springer, 2013. 
B. Robson and J. St. Clair                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Computers in Biology and Medicine 143 (2022) 105323
25
[66] de Raedt, L., Kimmig, A. and Toivonen, H., ProbLog: a probabilistic prolog and its 
application in link discovery, https://www.ijcai.org/Proceedings/07/Papers/397. 
pdf, (last accessed 28th January 2022). 
[67] M. Gregoriˇc, N./S. Mankoˇc Borˇstnik, Quantum gates and quantum algorithms with 
Clifford algebra technique, Int. J. Theor. Phys. 48 (2008) 2. 
[68] S. Ray, in: Quantum Threat to Blockchains: Shor’s and Grover’s Algorithms,, 
Codeburst, 2018. July 22 2018, https://codeburst.io/quantum-threat-to-blockcha 
ins-shors-and-grover-s-algorithms-9b01941bed01. 
B. Robson and J. St. Clair                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
