Source-PDF: D:\Review\Paper\Clinical prediction bridge (your current query, improved)\highest priority clinical bridge directly about disease predictiondiagnosis\Quantum-inspired seagull optimised deep belief network approach for cardiovascular disease prediction.pdf
Relative-Path: Paper\Clinical prediction bridge (your current query, improved)\highest priority clinical bridge directly about disease predictiondiagnosis\Quantum-inspired seagull optimised deep belief network approach for cardiovascular disease prediction.pdf
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Quantum-inspired seagull optimised deep
belief network approach for cardiovascular
disease prediction
D. Banumathy1, T. Vetriselvi2, K. Venkatachalam3 and Jaehyuk Cho4
1Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Paavai Engineering College, Namakkal, India
2 School of Computer science and Engineering, VIT University, Vellore, India
3 Department of Software Engineering, Jeonbuk National University, Jeonju-si,
Republic of South Korea
4 Department of Software Engineering & Division of Electronics and Information Engineering,
Jeonbuk National University, Jeonju-si, Republic of South Korea
ABSTRACT
The early detection and accurate diagnosis of cardiovascular diseases is vital to
reduce global morbidity and death rates. In this work, the quantum-inspired seagull
optimization algorithm (QISOA) combined with a deep belief network (DBN) is
proposed to improve the identiﬁcation of cardiovascular disorders. As part of
preprocessing, cleaning, transformation, and standardization are performed to
eliminate noise, inconsistencies, and scaling issues in the data. QISOA is used to
optimize the weights and biases of the DBN model, enhancing its prediction
efﬁciency. The algorithm incorporates quantum mechanics concepts to develop its
exploration potential further, leading to faster convergence and increased global
search efﬁciency. Optimized DBN provides efﬁcient acquisition of hierarchical
representations of the data, which results in improved feature learning and
classiﬁcation accuracy. The publicly accessible Cleveland Heart Disease dataset is
used to assess the performance of the suggested model. Extensive experiments are
conducted to demonstrate the superior performance of the QISOA-optimized DBN
model compared to traditional machine learning and other metaheuristic-based
models. Initially, machine learning models such as support vector machines, decision
trees, Random Forests, multi-layer perceptrons, and fully connected networks were
considered for comparison with the cardiovascular predictive performance of the
DBN model. Further, meta-heuristic optimization algorithms such as particle swarm
optimization, genetic algorithm, grey wolf optimization, cuckoo search optimization
and crow search algorithm are combined with the machine learning models and the
classiﬁcation efﬁciency is evaluated. Additionally, few state-of-the-art techniques
proposed in the existing literature are investigated and compared against the
proposed model. It was evident from the comprehensive performance assessment of
the proposed model that it yields a higher accuracy of 98.6% with precision, recall,
and F1-scores of 97.6%, 96.8%, and 97.1%, respectively, compared to other
traditional and existing models for cardiovascular disease prediction.
Subjects Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Data Mining and Machine Learning, Data Science, Optimization
Theory and Computation, Social Computing
Keywords Quantum computing, Deep belief networks, Seagull optimization, Heart disease
prediction, Deep learning
How to cite this article Banumathy D, Vetriselvi T, Venkatachalam K, Cho J. 2024. Quantum-inspired seagull optimised deep belief
network approach for cardiovascular disease prediction. PeerJ Comput. Sci. 10:e2498 DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.2498
Submitted 28 August 2024
Accepted 18 October 2024
Published 13 December 2024
Corresponding author
Jaehyuk Cho, chojh@jbnu.ac.kr
Academic editor
Bilal Alatas
Additional Information and
Declarations can be found on
page 26
DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.2498
Copyright
2024 Banumathy et al.
Distributed under
Creative Commons CC-BY 4.0

INTRODUCTION
As heart-related diseases have an elevated death rate worldwide, it has emerged as an
important medical priority for many individuals. Though conventional therapeutic
analysis of information poses considerable obstacles in diagnosing cardiac disorders such
as coronary artery disease, ischaemic attacks, cardiac arrest, chest pain, etc., early detection
of cardiac ailments has the potential to save many lives (Akella & Akella, 2021). Adult
males are more likely than females to develop cardiovascular disease, particularly in
middle-aged or older individuals. This rapid spike in cardiovascular illness puts a
substantial risk to community wellness and puts a signiﬁcant strain on globally connected
healthcare systems. In addition, the likelihood of cardiac disease is rising among
youngsters in wealthy nations. The threat of heart attacks and strokes is increased by
several improper lifestyle choices, which leads to high blood sugar levels, high blood
pressure, overweight and elevated fatty acids (Al-Tashi, Rais & Jadid, 2019).
In addition, there are further signs, including problems in respiration, inﬂammation of
limbs, insomnia, erratic heart rate, and, in rare cases, excessive obesity with continuously
increasing weight. Each of the above signs is symptomatic of many conditions, including
disorders that inﬂuence older adults, and they are more challenging to identify in the
earliest phases of the condition (Chicco & Jurman, 2020). A physiological evaluation of the
major arteries is utilised to identify heart diseases using pharmaceutical and
echocardiographic stress assessment. Yet another kind of imaging assessment for cardiac
disease is coronary artery imaging, which offers details on the underlying anatomy of the
circulatory system (García-Ordás et al., 2023). Nonetheless, the intricacy of the plaque’s
construction and the complicated structure of the heart make it possible for the illness to
be misdiagnosed. Furthermore, using contrast ﬂuid and regional sedation employed
during the diagnostic process harms the patient’s health.
Accurately assessing the possibility of cardiovascular disease helps prevent severe
myocardial catastrophes and safeguard individuals (Reddy et al., 2021). The exponential
advancement in artiﬁcial intelligence and machine learning have provided researchers
access to vast datasets to develop the most accurate prediction model. Machine learning
(ML) and deep learning (DL) algorithms are capable of making precise medical diagnoses
when trained on pertinent data (Kishor & Chakraborty, 2022). Therefore, research into the
effects of danger indicators, how frequently they occur in people of all ages, their
signiﬁcant inﬂuence on speciﬁc heart conditions, and their therapeutic potential to lower
the incidence of heart diseases is imperative.
Moreover, when using these methods for forecasting a particular disease, it is crucial to
remember the optimal characteristics. The input dataset, in general, will be initially
unreliable and include irrelevant and duplicated information with overlapping entries and
inaccurate data (Enad & Mohammed, 2023). Selecting the most vital and signiﬁcant
characteristics that could be applied to identifying or categorising the targeted disease is
crucial for predictive modelling. The essential attribute pairings that maximise the
predictive potential and aid in improving the accuracy of the machine learning model
should be selected to create reliable estimations (Sarra et al., 2022).
Banumathy et al. (2024), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.2498
2/31

Depending on their feature selection methods, many researchers consider different
probabilistic variables or features as input for their models when modelling the
predictors for such diseases (Nandy et al., 2023). Several factors are considered when
implementing cardiovascular disease prediction models, including lifespan, elevated
cholesterol levels, blood sugar levels, heartburn, arterial pressure, anxiety, heart rate
variability, genetic background, inadequate nutrition, weight gain, usage of alcohol, and
lack of physical activity. These elements are crucial for identifying and categorising
diseases (Alsubai et al., 2023).
The inﬂuence of feature selection algorithms goes beyond making learning algorithms
more capable of classifying data and making dataset reduction in dimension possible. As a
result, selecting characteristics involves solving a multi-objective optimisation task that
maximises classiﬁcation effectiveness while minimising the number of features (Ghosh
et al., 2021). Optimisation is a vital and signiﬁcant ﬁeld in scientiﬁc research and
engineering applications. Multi-objective optimisation problems typically involve
optimising many objectives simultaneously in practical settings. Multi-objective
optimisation tasks, in contrast to single-objective ones, seek to identify the optimum
solutions or the most suitable paths in the choice space (Ozpolat & Karabatak, 2023).
Multi-objective optimisation is among the trickiest and most well-liked challenges in
current evolutionary computing research. When a multi-objective optimisation issue is
solved, equitable solutions are typically produced. To produce a solution set that covers the
complete outcomes as much as possible, the optimisation algorithm must discover
solutions that are as close to as feasible (Ullah et al., 2022). As a result, multi-objective
optimisation algorithms must strike a balance between the distribution of optimal
solutions and the algorithm’s convergence. Nevertheless, local optimization is a common
difﬁculty with multi-objective optimization methods, which can result in uneven
convergence and distribution issues.
In the past 10 years, a new topic of study called quantum computing (QC) has attracted
much attention. It deals with studies on quantum machines and quantum computations.
The foundational ideas of quantum mechanics, such as qubit encoding and dynamic
superposition, are used in quantum computing (Maheshwari et al., 2023). Large numbers
of quantum states can be processed concurrently using quantum computing. Because of its
fundamental notions, this quantum computing technology gives optimization a new
philosophical perspective. Research combining quantum computing and evolutionary
computation has recently garnered increasing attention conceptually and operationally
(Kavitha & Kaulgud, 2023). The goal is to use the power of quantum computing to
improve the speed and efﬁciency of traditional evolutionary algorithms. As a result,
numerous algorithms such as genetic (Saad et al., 2021), particle swarm (Agrawal, Kaur &
Agarwal, 2021), binary bat (Sharma & Sharma, 2022), and differential evolution (Wang &
Wang, 2021) algorithms have been developed and inﬂuenced by quantum mechanics.
Quantum-inspired algorithms do not require a quantum machine to function, in contrast
to classical quantum computing. Numerous combinatorial optimization issues have been
effectively resolved using algorithms with quantum inspiration (Kavitha & Kaulgud, 2023).
Banumathy et al. (2024), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.2498
3/31

By utilizing the ideas of quantum computing, metaheuristic optimization algorithms
can perform even better. It has always been challenging to create an appropriate
equilibrium in metaheuristic algorithms between exploration, which is the global search,
and exploitation, which is considered the local search, as concentrating on one undermines
the other (Priya, VinilaJinny & Mate, 2020). The primary beneﬁt of applying quantum
computing techniques in metaheuristics is strengthening the global search capability
without degrading the algorithmic exploitation phase.
This study offers a quantum-based improved seagull optimization algorithm (QISOA)
to optimize the convergence and distribution of solutions in multi-objective optimization
problems. The QISOA is an integrated algorithm that combines the seagull optimization
algorithm with a search method motivated by quantum mechanics. The concept of
superposition, quantization gates, and waves that remain stationary from quantum
mechanics has been incorporated into quantum-inspired search algorithms, which are
simple to locate in localized convergence of global searches. Furthermore, the seagull
optimization does well in local searches, preserving the equilibrium between exploitation
and exploration.
In this work, deep belief networks is employed to classify cardiovascular disease. A deep
belief network (DBN), an established algorithm used in deep learning, combines low-level
data to ﬁnd distributed feature representations, generating a more abstract high-level
model. Using aggressive learning, it can directly extract fundamental features from
minimal information layer by layer. The DBN can improve detection ability by avoiding
the added ambiguity and intricacy of conventional feature discovery. Consequently, DBN
is frequently used to classify problems in the healthcare domain for disease diagnosis. The
QISOA with superior optimisation performance is utilised to choose the the parameters in
Deep Belief networks to address the subjective identiﬁcation problem. By removing human
factor interference and adaptively choosing the best DBN settings, the QISOA-DBN
approach can increase the classiﬁcation accuracy of cardiovascular diseases.
Research questions
The present research is carried out to ﬁnd answers to the following questions,
a. How successful is the quantum inspired seagull optimisation algorithm (QISOA) at
optimising the deep belief network’s parameters?
b. Does the QISOA algorithm enhance the DBN’s ultimate performance and rate of
convergence?
c. What are the possible outcomes of using the QISOA-DBN model for the early detection
of cardiovascular diseases?
Research contributions
The major contributions of this research are,
1. To propose a quantum-inspired seagull optimization algorithm that incorporates
quantum principles into the conventional seagull optimization algorithm to improve
Banumathy et al. (2024), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.2498
4/31

the balance between exploration and exploitation, which leads to better convergence
towards optimal solutions.
2. To implement deep learning-based methods such as deep belief networks algorithm
optimized by QISOA technique to perform cardiovascular disease prediction with
enhanced efﬁciency and reliability.
3. To conduct a comprehensive performance analysis of the proposed QISOA-DBN
model to demonstrate its effectiveness in diagnosing cardiovascular disorders by
comparing it to the state-of-the-art methods described in the literature.
Paper organization
The remainder of the article is organized as follows: “Related Works” describes the state-
of-the-art work on cardiovascular disease identiﬁcation using ML/DL techniques and
optimization algorithms. “Preliminaries” provides a theoretical background on quantum
computing concepts and conventional seagull optimisation techniques. “Proposed
Methodology” discusses the proposed methodology addressing the core concepts of the
suggested QISOA-DBN approach. “Results and Discussion” presents the results obtained
by applying various ML/DL techniques on the Cleveland Heart Disease prediction dataset
and compares the existing and proposed systems. “Conclusion” concludes the present
research.
RELATED WORKS
The subsequent section expounds on the diverse approaches and formulations employed
in prognosticating cardiac anomalies and the former methods of evaluating the diagnosis
of heart illness to mitigate its advancement. The proposed method in Wang et al. (2023a)
uses convolutional neural networks bi-directional long short-term memory to build an
integrated approach based on deep learning determining whether an individual has been
adversely affected by heart disease. Using data processing methodology has resolved issues
with erroneous and inconsistent data values in a dataset. Additionally, it has employed
more tree-based learners in the feature extraction and categorization process. Many patient
records have been successfully used to improve the system’s performance under
consideration, and the dynamic detection framework has been handled with multiple data
points collected from different periods. To generate a vector of characteristics based on
time for medical diagnosis, the experimental evaluations have demonstrated classiﬁcation
outcomes with the smoothing-based erratic recurring time throughout different stages.
With the integration of intelligent medical care systems, deep learning architecture has
been shown to advance as a diagnostic instrument for improved clinical treatment and
decreased detection expenditure.
Inaccurate identiﬁcation and premature disease detection have been the main
contributing factors to morbidity from heart conditions. Accurate classiﬁcation of heart
failure requires efﬁcient algorithmic parameter tweaking and training (Tharwat &
Hassanien, 2019). The over-ﬁtting problem has affected several sophisticated mechanisms
designed for the automatic identiﬁcation of cardiac failures, which signiﬁcantly negatively
impacts the system’s accuracy. The recommended methods have weakened the accuracy
Banumathy et al. (2024), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.2498
5/31

performance of testing and training data. The diagnostic procedure employed a random
search technique to ﬁnd relevant features for disease prediction (Yildirim et al., 2021). Two
different types of assessments have been used to evaluate the accuracy of the suggested
system. The Random Forest model was used in the initial experiment, and the random
search procedure was experimented with as the second model. Compared to the
conventional method, the accuracy has been observed to be higher and the complexity to
be lower. Eleven distinct algorithms have been compared to assess the system’s
effectiveness (Tharwat & Hassanien, 2018).
Different kinds of patient data are collected by healthcare organisations, which has
aided physicians in accurately diagnosing patients’ medical conditions. The symptoms that
patients have reported, the initial diagnosis made by the medical professionals, and
comprehensive test results that may help forecast cardiac abnormalities are all included in
this health information (Munshi et al., 2024). Professional physicians have used this data to
analyse and conﬁrm the illness. With artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) based algorithms like
artiﬁcial neural networks to determine whether or not the patient has been affected,
accurate identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation have been completed by the recommended study
(Abdulsalam, Meshoul & Shaiba, 2023).
To improve the learners, the UCI heart disease dataset and a voting-based method were
used in the suggested study (Asif et al., 2023). While machine learning technologies help
evaluate large amounts of data, they sometimes include extraneous and irrelevant elements
that negatively impact classiﬁcation accuracy and processing performance. A feature
selection procedure has been used in the examined research to remove undesirable and
irrelevant data features. The ideal subset for diagnosing heart-related disorders has been
identiﬁed by selecting features using the wrapper technique. A quantum-inspired genetic
algorithm (Sarra et al., 2022) was used to choose the best features from the dataset. The
support vector machine (SVM) classiﬁer has also assessed the algorithm’s ﬁtness.
When it comes to predicting heart problems, the quantum particle swarm optimisation
combined with the SVM model has the highest level of accuracy. Rao & Prasad (2021) uses
QPSO to adjust the ideal SVM parameter to predict heart diseases accurately. Future heart
disease prognostic implementations should incorporate various techniques to increase
detection efﬁciency and precision for real-time use. According to one study
(AvinashPrabhu & Parthipan, 2022), the suggested method outperforms existing
classiﬁcation techniques regarding precise prediction and economical computing time.
According to Bharti et al. (2021), using quantum-based technology shortens computing
times, which improves system performance.
The application of the quantum paradigm shows promise for accelerating the clustering
process. Using a quantum circuit method on the heart disease dataset, the quantum K-
means clustering technique was used in Kumar et al. (2021) to ﬁnd instances of heart
disease. The study results show that the quantum mechanical clustering technique
performs noticeably faster than the conventional clustering method at a time complexity.
In addition, a comparison of performance metrics between quantum and classical
processing (Nagarajan et al., 2022).
Banumathy et al. (2024), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.2498
6/31

Fibrous bands of tissue can form between the heart and surrounding structures, such as
the pericardium (the protective sac around the heart), following surgical procedures like
open-heart surgery (Wang et al., 2023b; Zhang et al., 2021). This phenomenon occurs
through various pathways, including the induction of inﬂammation, ﬁbrosis, and the
promotion of the transition of valve interstitial cells (VICs) into osteoblast-like cells, which
are responsible for depositing calcium in the valve (Huang et al., 2024; Huang, Shu &
Liang, 2024). Counterfactual analysis is valuable in enhancing the robustness of AI systems
by enabling them to check their predictions against hypothetical changes, thereby
improving accuracy and reducing error (Cai et al., 2024; Sun et al., 2023). Additionally, in
real-time diagnostic settings, cytopathologists can use a technique called rapid on-site
evaluation (ROSE) to assess cells collected during a biopsy or surgery while the procedure
is still ongoing (Lahori et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023). At the molecular level, the enzyme
ALKBH5 normally removes m6A modiﬁcations from mRNA, which plays a key role in
regulating how long the mRNA remains intact and available for translation into proteins
(Zhao et al., 2021; Li et al., 2023). Traditional AI approaches simulate decision-making
processes using algorithms and computational models (Chen et al., 2023; Duan et al.,
2023). However, deep learning has emerged as a powerful tool to enhance the resolution
and speed up image reconstruction, making super-resolution imaging faster and more
accessible (Luan et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2023). In another biological process, long non-
coding RNAs (lncRNAs) act as “sponges” by binding to microRNAs (miRNAs) and
preventing them from interacting with their target mRNAs, thus inﬂuencing gene
expression (Zhou et al., 2022; Bing et al., 2022). Similarly, reduced blood ﬂow to the brain,
often due to atherosclerotic blockages in the carotid arteries, can negatively affect brain
function, leading to cognitive decline, including impairments in memory, attention, and
processing abilities (Huo et al., 2022). Quantum approaches were found to be excellent
choices for early cardiac disease prediction. These quantum machine learning techniques
classify heart disease datasets reported areas under the curve value of 97.42%, respectively
(Mehmood et al., 2021). The utilisation of the complete dataset was impacted by the
constraints placed by the study resources. The application of quantitative structure-activity
connection machine learning approaches produced a 94.73% predictive accuracy for heart
disease, according to the ﬁndings of this study. Table 1 compares the existing works on
cardiovascular disease detection.
Motivations of current research
The cardiovascular disease diagnosis techniques currently in operation frequently have low
diagnosis rates, and thus, improvement in detection rates usually necessitates several
iterations with poor convergence. This shortcoming emphasizes the need for a quicker and
more precise diagnosis technique that might improve the general efﬁcacy of heart disease
prediction. Using sophisticated machine learning models—especially those inﬂuenced by
quantum algorithms—offers a viable way to improve heart disease diagnostic performance.
By increasing the precision of disease prediction, utilizing approaches like QISOA and
DBN may be able to advance beyond the drawbacks of the present methods. Machine
learning models such as DBNs must ﬁne-tune their parameters for better classiﬁcation
Banumathy et al. (2024), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.2498
7/31

accuracy. QISOA offers a valuable mechanism to strike a balance between exploration and
exploitation in the search space, thus it is implemented to improve the efﬁciency of the
DBN model.
PRELIMINARIES
This section elaborates on the fundamental concepts in the quantum computing domain
and briefs on the conventional seagull optimization technique.
Basics of quantum computing
Quantum computing’s foundations are quantum physics, with the Schrodinger equation as
the underlying principle. Unlike the traditional approach, quantum computing
demonstrates its potential to operate more quickly, particularly when tackling
complicated, challenging problems requiring a wide range of possible solutions. This
section describes some of the basic concepts in quantum computing.
Qubit
In quantum computing, the tiniest information is denoted as the qubit. The qubit vectors
in quantum computing exist in two possible states, which are j0i and j1i and it is
represented as shown in Eq. (1) as:
j0i ¼
1
0


and
j1i ¼
0
1


:
(1)
Table 1 Comparison of existing works on cardiovascular disease detection
References
Technique used
Inferences
Limitations
Maheshwari et al.
(2023)
Quantum-based
swarm optimization
Demonstrates higher values of sensitivity, speciﬁcity,
accuracy, and precision
The proposed system needs to be implemented in
real-time data to improve the performance
further
Kavitha &
Kaulgud (2023)
Quantum K-means
clustering
Higher accuracy levels of 95.87%
Appropriate feature selection and optimization
methods not implemented
Wang et al.
(2023a)
Hybrid random forest
and CNN
Minimal false alarms are produced by this method
The model needs to be enhanced by applying it to
larger datasets
Tharwat &
Hassanien
(2019)
Quantum-inspired
particle swarm
optimization
Provides efﬁcient solutions for the identiﬁcation of
affected individuals with heart diseases
The model needs to be ﬁne-tuned with more real-
time data to maximize the predictive analysis
Yildirim et al.
(2021)
Deep neural networks
Maximized performance is achieved with increased
accuracy and precision values
The computational cost of the recommended
approach is high
Tharwat &
Hassanien
(2018)
Quantum SVM
This suggested technique exhibits maximum
accuracy value for label prediction
Feature fusion techniques are not implemented
Munshi et al.
(2024)
Quantum genetic
algorithm
Extensive evaluation of the proposed technique is
performed, including and excluding irregularities
in data
Deep learning algorithms can be combined with
the proposed techniques to improve accuracy
Abdulsalam,
Meshoul &
Shaiba (2023)
Quantum ensemble
model
Process overhead is the minimum
Training time is high
Banumathy et al. (2024), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.2498
8/31

In the above equation, each term is considered as the intricate conjugate transposition of
the other.
Superposition
Superposition is the ordered combination of the vectors involved in the computation. The
quantum superposition for the vectors represented in Eq. (1) is as shown in Eq. (2),
jwi ¼ aj0i þ bj1i:
(2)
The values of the qubit product and angle between vectors are determined using the
representations given in Eq. (3),
q ¼ ab
and
d ¼ arc tanðb=aÞ:
(3)
Gates
Quantum gates are the primary components essential to processing information. The four
major types of gates involved in data processing are rotation gates, NOT gates, Hadamard
gates, and controlled-NOT gates.
Coherence
Coherence for each qubit state is calculated using the Hilbert spectrum of contributing
wave processes, jwi. A consistent phase association is measured and recorded during this
procedure. Decoherence is the reverse of a coherent occurrence. It happens when the phase
connection that links the wave processes is forced to be broken or when the quantum
superposition of the involved basic states fails.
Conventional seagull optimization
An innovative swarm optimization algorithm mimics seagulls’ relocating and assaulting
activity is called the seagull optimization algorithm (SOA) (Asif et al., 2023). For multi-
objective optimisation problems, an SOA extension has been created that incorporates
variable network, leader-selection, and conserving techniques. When migrating, they move
in clusters. To avoid crashes, seagulls adjust their initial points of interest. The gulls will
ﬂock together and ﬂy towards the ﬁttest gull, who has the most chance of surviving. The
other seagulls will adjust their starting places based on the most ﬁtting gull. When birds
travel from one spot to another over the sea, gulls attack them. When they attack, they
move in a spiral pattern. The migration operation uses the SOA’s exploratory power to
replicate how a ﬂock of seagulls moves from one location to another. The attack operation
uses the algorithm’s exploitative power to mimic how ﬂocks of seagulls pursue their target.
PROPOSED METHODOLOGY
The proposed research aims to provide an efﬁcient technique for cardiovascular disease
classiﬁcation by integrating the concepts of quantum computing, deep learning, and
optimization algorithms. This work modiﬁes the conventional seagull optimization by
Banumathy et al. (2024), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.2498
9/31

introducing quantum principles to make it a multi-objective optimization algorithm. This
quantum-inspired seagull optimization algorithm is further used to choose the parameters
of the DBN algorithm, which is employed as the classiﬁcation technique for cardiovascular
disease diagnosis. This section ﬁrst describes the data preprocessing techniques applied to
the dataset. Secondly, the QISOA technique is explained in detail, highlighting its various
steps. Thirdly, the deep belief network algorithm, which is optimized by the QISOA
technique to enhance performance efﬁciency, is described. The workﬂow of the proposed
methodology is presented in Fig. 1.
Figure 1 Proposed workﬂow.
Full-size

DOI: 10.7717/peerj-cs.2498/ﬁg-1
Banumathy et al. (2024), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.2498
10/31

Data preprocessing
The data preprocessing in this work involves three techniques: cleaning, transformation,
and standardization. Data cleaning is essential to identify and eliminate redundant,
erroneous, or unavailable values. Data transformation is needed to remove compatibility
issues based on the nature of the data. Data standardization employs statistical approaches
to normalize the data values within a particular range.
Data cleaning
An essential ﬁrst step is data cleaning, carefully reviewing the dataset to look for any
irregularities, such as errors, outliers, or missing numbers. Missing values have to be
approximated or eradicated from the dataset, and inconsistencies and abnormalities are
corrected or discarded when found. Missing values should be appropriately addressed
during data preparation for accurate and trustworthy analysis. In the Cleveland Heart
Disease dataset, 293 redundant rows have been altered and removed. As a result, 292
unique cases—158 matched patients with heart disease and 134 matched patients without
heart disease—were identiﬁed. Furthermore, 262 instances that were similar to each other
have been identiﬁed, which resulted in the removal of repetitions.
Data transformation
The learning performance may be low when speciﬁc data properties have large input
values that conﬂict with other features. As a result, a record investigation was done to
examine and choose relationships visually to ﬁt different aspects. Features such as thal and
slope, which have larger values, are split further into three values, and one encoding is
applied to the dataset. These three features are separated into thal_00, thal_01, thal_02 and
thal_03, and slope_00, slope_01, slope_02 and slope_03 before they are merged with the
initial data sets. The data are scaled according to the ﬁndings of the statistical assessment
before being processed further.
Data standardization
The range of values in the distribution is taken, the mean is subtracted, and the data are
then divided by the standard deviation to normalize it. Scaling is performed by dividing
every value in the data by the standard deviation and removing the average from the data
values. The mathematical representation given in Eq. (4) is used for standardization,
a0 ¼ a  l
r
:
(4)
The value in standardised form for original data a is computed as a0 using standard
deviation and mean values such as r and l respectively. The values of r and l are
determined by using the formulas in Eqs. (5) and (6),
r ¼
ﬃﬃﬃ
1
K
r
X
K
n¼1
aK ðAn  lÞ2:
(5)
Banumathy et al. (2024), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.2498
11/31

l ¼
PK
n¼1 A:K
K
:
(6)
The data is normalised by taking the highest and lowest values in the data range using
the formula in Eq. (7),
b0 ¼
B  Blow
Bhigh  Blow
:
(7)
QISOA
The QISOA approach incorporates quantum computing superposition concepts, layout
ranking, seagull mobility and assault behaviour, and opposition-driven learning (ODL).
The ODL process initialises the seagull group to produce an improved setup population.
The real-coded quantum representation of the existing ideal approach and quantum
rotation gate have been adjusted to more effectively preserve an equilibrium between
exploration and exploitation to attain the best possible solutions. A layout mechanism that
combined the layout density ordering and the global layout ordering additionally offered
an indicator for the maintenance and selection of leaders.
Step 1: Initializing population using ODL mechanism
The likelihood of sampling better regions in population-based algorithms is decreased
by initialisation using random roulette in conventional evolutionary algorithms when
beforehand data is not available. On the other hand, without previously acquired
knowledge, ODL can identify more appropriate initial candidate regions, raising the
likelihood of identifying superior regions and holding out hope for enhancing ﬁtness.
Step 2: Choosing the best possible solution
This step employs layout density ordering and global layout ordering mechanisms to
characterize the most optimal solutions. This technique can display the differences in
objective values between optimal solutions and alternative solutions and highlight the
superiority and inferiority of each option. This work uses layout density ordering (LDO) to
increase the spread of the solutions and global layout ordering (GLO) to improve the
algorithm’s efﬁciency.
The total number of unique layout positions in each objective that are better than those
of other points can be calculated by the GLO technique as represented in Eq. (8):
GLOðakÞ ¼
X
Pk
h¼1
countðLmðakÞ<LmðalÞÞ:
(8)
In Eq. (8), ak and al are two individuals chosen from the population created using
Algorithm 1 in which k and l are different. LmðakÞ denotes the layout positions of ak for one
objective from the total set of objectives represented as Pk: Furthermore, the value of LDO
is computed as given in Eq. (9):
LDOðakÞ ¼ count
X
Pk
h¼1
jLmðakÞ  LmðalÞ j < G
 
!
:
(9)
Banumathy et al. (2024), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.2498
12/31

In the above equation, G represents the present set of objectives in the population. This
mechanism prefers the candidate solution with a higher GLO value among those in the
collection. Furthermore, when multiple solutions have identical GLO values, the solution
with the lowest value is favored as the best option. A roulette wheel chooses a solution as
the optimal solution among several solutions with the same GLO values.
Step 3: Quantum illustration of best solutions
This step is comprised of the quantum illustration of the best possible solution and the
quantum rotation gate, which updates the likelihood magnitudes of two states. A
combined function of dimensions and duration, known as the wave function, is needed to
fully characterize a quantum state in the theory of quantum mechanics. The magnitude
coefﬁcient denotes the likelihood that the quantum state will occur at a suitable place and
time. To compute the observed values of the quantum illustration, a typical wave function
is implemented as shown in Eq. (10):
jWðakÞj2 ¼
1ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2phk
p
exp  ðak  lkÞ2
2h2
k
"
#
:
(10)
In the above equation, lk denotes the average location of the individual and hk
represents the dispersal spectrum of the individuals with respect to the value of lk. The
quantum illustration of the best possible solution (Ri
c) is determined using Eq. (11) as:
Ri
c ¼
4 ac;1
ac;2
. . .
ac;k
c1
c2
. . .
ck


:
(11)
In Eq. (11), i represents the present iteration for a set of values, ck represents the
coefﬁcient of magnitude for each optimal solution.
Step 4: Seagull exploration
During this stage, the seagulls relocate themselves from one position to another
so they do not collide. The orientation of relocation without interference is
Algorithm 1 Initializing population using ODL.
1: Input: N (a1, a2; . . . ; an) are points in a T-dimensional space where ak 2 ½xk; yk and k ¼ 1; 2; 3; . . . ; T
2: Output: Final population N
3: Step 1: Initialize the start values Nk and categorize into two groups: N1 and N2
4:
Generate individuals arbitrarily in group N1
5: Step 2: Produce opposite points using Orthogonal Design Layout (ODL)
~ak ¼ xk þ yk  ak
and insert these into group N2
6: Step 3: Merge the populations of N1 and N2
7: Step 4: Eliminate overlapped individuals in both groups by applying intersection operation
8: Step 5: Apply arbitrary functions to balance the eliminated individuals
9:
Generate the ﬁnal population N
Banumathy et al. (2024), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.2498
13/31

determined using the movement nature of the seagull in the search space (F) as shown
in Eq. (12):
Dz ¼ F  CzðiÞ:
(12)
In the above equation, Cz represents the present location of individual and Dz denotes
the relocated position such that it does not collide with any other individual in the search
space. The value of F is computed in a non-linear fashion in order to improve the efﬁciency
of the algorithm using Eq. (13):
F ¼ msð2s  1Þ
(13)
s ¼ e1 
imax
imax  i :
(14)
The relocation direction of each individual in quantum representation towards the best
possible solution is given using Eq. (15) as:
Ez ¼ G  ðRcðiÞ  CzðiÞÞ
(15)
G ¼ 2  F2  randð0; 1Þ:
(16)
The modiﬁed position of the relocated seagull is calculated by combining the values of
the orientation of relocation without interference and relocation direction towards the best
possible solution as shown in Eq. (17):
Pz ¼ jDz þ Ezj:
(17)
Step 5: Assault behaviour of seagull
During the process of relocating from one position to another, seagulls implement an
assault against each other in a 3-D space. The movement of seagulls in 3-D space is
described in Eqs. (18) to (21):
u ¼ rd  cosðlÞ
(18)
v ¼ rd  sinðlÞ
(19)
w ¼ rd  l
(20)
rd ¼ m  eln:
(21)
In the above equations, l is an arbitrary value between 0 and 2p and rd denotes the
radius with which the seagull makes a spiral motion in the orientation of m and n. The
updated position of the seagull is an aggregation of the relocation and assault behaviour,
and the ﬁnal most optimal position is determined as shown in Eq. (22):
CzðiÞ ¼ ðPz  u  v  wÞ þ RcðiÞ:
(22)
QISOA-DBN
One neural network that is stacked with numerous supervised back propagation networks
as well as restricted Boltzmann machine networks is the DBN. The DBN model is
Banumathy et al. (2024), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.2498
14/31

extensively used in the healthcare domain for disease prediction and classiﬁcation, due to
its great approximation capability to the nonlinear function. The arbitrary initialisation of
the DBN connectivity weights as well as biases results in a lack of global optimisation
potential and ﬁnal descent into the local optimum. As a result, the DBN’s connection
weights and biases have a signiﬁcant impact on the reliability of disease classiﬁcation.
The QISOA algorithm handles the functions of quick convergence, population
variability, and global search potential. To maximise each node’s connection weights, the
QISOA with global optimization potential is incorporated into the DBN. To achieve an
optimised DBN such as the QISOA-DBN model, a parametric optimization approach
based on QISOA is proposed. This method helps to prevent a lack of clarity in parameter
selection, minimise its effect on modelling precision, and improve the efﬁciency of the
model for forecasting and classifying cardiovascular diseases.
A transparent layer and a concealed layer constitute every restricted Boltzmann
machine. For any neuron x in the transparent layer and y in the concealed layer denoted as
(t,c), the energy parameter is represented as in Eq. (23):
EG t; cjd
ð
Þ ¼ 
X
X
x¼1
mxtx 
X
Y
j¼1
nycy
X
X
x¼1
X
Y
y¼1
txwxycy:
(23)
In the above equation, d ¼ ðwxy; mx; nyÞ in which wxy denotes the weight parameter
between the nodes in the transparent and concealed layers t and c, respectively. mx and ny
are the bias values for t and c layers. The joint probability distribution is computed based
on the energy parameter calculated using Eq. (23) as given in Eq. (24):
JP t; cjd
ð
Þ ¼ eEG t;cjd
ð
Þ=½RðdÞ:
(24)
In Eq. (24), the standardization parameter is determined as R d
ð Þ ¼ P
t
P
c eEG t;cjd
ð
Þ.
The actuation states of the nodes in the concealed layer are independent since there is no
connection between the layers in the restricted Boltzamnn when the state of the nodes in
the transparent layer is determined. The likelihood of actuating a node from the concealed
layer y is given by the Eq. (25):
JP cy ¼ 1jt; d


¼ r ny þ
X
X
x¼1
txwyx
 
!
:
(25)
In the above equation, the sigmoid function rðaÞ is given by rðaÞ ¼
1
1þea. Similarly, the
likelihood of actuating neurons from the transparent layer is given by the Eq. (26) as:
JP tx ¼ 1jc; d
ð
Þ ¼ r mx þ
X
Y
y¼1
cxwyx
 
!
:
(26)
The sensitivity (4x) in the ﬁnal output layer (fx) is calculated from the actual value (vx)
as in Eq. (27):
4x ¼ fxð1  fxÞðvx  fxÞ:
(27)
Banumathy et al. (2024), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.2498
15/31

Similarly, the sensitivity for ith layer can be expressed as shown in Eq. (28):
4i
x ¼ gi
x 1  gi
x

 X
y wi
xy 4iþ1
y
:
(28)
The modiﬁed mathematical formulations for the weight as well as bias values for every
layer of the deep belief network as the rate of learning (c) for every epoch is given by
Eqs. (29) to (31):
wi
xy ¼ wi
xy þ c  gi
x 4iþ1
y
(29)
mi
xy ¼ mi
y þ c  4iþ1
y
(30)
ni
xy ¼ ni
y þ c  4iþ1
y
:
(31)
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
This section presents the dataset used in assessing the proposed system’s performance. It
compares the experimental results obtained with traditional machine learning and deep
learning algorithms, optimized ML/DL techniques, and a few existing works from the
literature.
Dataset description
The Cleveland benchmark dataset from the UCI machine learning repository is used in
this study. The Cleveland dataset has fourteen characteristics and 303 records. The
classiﬁcation of the target attribute is represented with two class values labeled 1 and 0,
denoting patients with and without heart disease, respectively. The assortment is
approximately balanced because 165 records represent individuals having heart disease
and 138 records represent individuals without heart disease. The dataset used in this
research can be accessed using the link: https://archive.ics.uci.edu/dataset/45/heart
+disease. This dataset is a combination of numerical and categorical features. The
numerical features in the dataset include age, cholesterol, resting blood pressure,
maximum heart rate, ST depression, and number of major vessels. The categorical features
in this dataset are chest pain types, sex, fasting blood sugar, resting electrocardiogram,
exercise-induced angina, ST slope, and Thalassemia. The data distribution of numerical
and categorical features is analyzed and presented in Figs. 2 and 3.
Experimental setup
The experimental setup used in this research includes an NVIDIA GTX 1080 Ti as a
dedicated GPU with CUDA compatibility with 16GB RAM and Windows 11 Operating
System. Python 3.7 version is utilized with the Jupyter Notebook environment for code
execution. Libraries such as TensorFlow, pandas, numpy, scikit-learn and matplotlib were
used for the algorithm implementation.
The parameter settings for the QISOA-DBN model are described in this section. The
population size of QISOA, which speciﬁes the number of seagull agents, is 50, with
maximum optimization iterations set as 200. The quantum parameter, which balances
exploration and exploitation, is assigned a value of 0.5. The inertia weight, which controls
Banumathy et al. (2024), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.2498
16/31

the impact of previous positions on the current iteration, is set to decrease from 0.9 to 0.4.
The adaptation speed of seagull agents is 0.7. The probability of mutation to maintain
diversity is assigned as 0.05. The DBN model comprises ﬁve layers with four stacked
Restricted Boltzmann Machine layers. The model is executed for 300 iterations with a
maximum number of nodes set as 20 and a minimum number of nodes set as 2,000. The
Figure 2 Distribution analysis of numerical features in Cleveland Heart Disease dataset.
Full-size

DOI: 10.7717/peerj-cs.2498/ﬁg-2
Banumathy et al. (2024), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.2498
17/31

Figure 3 Distribution analysis of categorical features in Cleveland Heart Disease dataset.
Full-size

DOI: 10.7717/peerj-cs.2498/ﬁg-3
Banumathy et al. (2024), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.2498
18/31

learning rate for the ﬁrst, second, and third layers is 0.015. The learning rate for the ﬁnal
fourth layer of RBM is set to be 0.001. The value of the initial momentum is initialized with
0.5, and the regularization parameter, which prevents overﬁtting by penalizing large
weights, is assigned as 0.001.
Experimental evaluation
The correlation matrix representing the relationship between each of the variables in the
dataset is presented in Fig. 4. The inferences interpreted from the details in Fig. 5 are
presented in Table 2.
From the correlation matrix obtained it can be inferred that chest pain type, maximum
heart rate, ST slope, number of major vessels and thalassemia are the most important
features that can predict the presence of heart diseases. These features have strong positive
correlations with the target indicating that the individual is affected by heart disease. The
features such as exercise-induced angina and oldpeak can also be considered as signiﬁcant
contributors as they are correlated with several other features. The performance of the
existing and proposed techniques is assessed using metrics such as accuracy, precision,
recall and F1-score.
For this research, accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score are critical performance
indicators since they offer a thorough assessment of the suggested QISOA-DBN model’s
efﬁcacy in classifying heart diseases. While precision concentrates on the consistency of
positive diagnoses while reducing false positives, accuracy assesses the overall correctness
of forecasts. By minimising false negatives, recall evaluates the model’s sensitivity in
detecting actual cases of heart disease. Because false positives and false negatives can both
have serious repercussions in medical applications, the F1-score, which is the harmonic
mean of precision and recall, offers a balanced measurement.
The confusion matrix is built using the predictions made by various models based on
true positive/negative and false positive/negative values.
Initially, the performance of the DBN model is compared with the baseline machine
learning and deep learning models such as support vector machines (SVM), Random
Forest (RF), decision trees (DT), multilayer perceptrons (MLP), and fully convolutional
networks (FCN).
Support vector machines (SVM): SVM is a supervised learning approach that divides
observations into different categories by determining the best hyperplane. SVM is useful in
heart disease research for binary classiﬁcation and performs well with high-dimensional
data, assisting in the discovery of correlations that point to the presence of heart disease.
Random Forest (RF): Several decision trees are constructed using the Random Forest
ensemble learning technique, combining them to increase the model’s predictability and
reduce overﬁtting. RF handles large datasets with numerous attributes in heart disease
research, yielding reliable insights into the signiﬁcance of various risk indicators for heart
disease.
Decision trees (DT): A decision tree is a straightforward yet effective method that
divides data into branches depending on feature values to make predictions. Because of its
Banumathy et al. (2024), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.2498
19/31

interpretability, DTs are employed in heart disease research to determine which features—
such as age and blood pressure—are most important in predicting the risk of heart disease.
Multilayer perceptrons (MLP): This model is a composition of multiple layers of
neurons that are capable of learning intricate, non-linear correlations from data. This
technique is effective in forecasting the existence or severity of heart disease, complex
patterns, and interactions between different clinical and demographic data related to
cardiovascular research.
Fully convolutional networks (FCN): This is a deep learning architecture mainly used to
analyze sequential data in heart disease research. It is a valuable tool for identifying
patterns in heart disease data because it can automatically extract features from raw data
without requiring manual feature extraction.
The confusion matrix obtained based on the predictions made by each model is
presented in Fig. 5.
Table 3 presents the performance metric values obtained according to the efﬁciency of
the models in classifying heart diseases. It can be observed that the SVM model produces
an accuracy of 92.35%, precision of 91.32%, recall of 90.53% and F1-score of 91.75%. RF
model produces a lower accuracy of 83.21% compared to the SVM model. The precision,
recall and F1 score values are also less, with 82.36%, 81.65% and 82.95%, respectively. The
DT model shows the least performance with poor accuracy of 81.52% compared to the
other baseline models. MLP model shows a better performance compared to SVM, RF and
DT models with an average accuracy of 93.25%, precision of 92.45%, recall of 91.36% and
Figure 4 Correlation analysis of features in Cleveland Heart Disease dataset.
Full-size

DOI: 10.7717/peerj-cs.2498/ﬁg-4
Banumathy et al. (2024), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.2498
20/31

F1 score of 92.86%. The FCN model is 94.51% accurate in classifying cardiovascular
disease with 93.31%, 91.64% and 92.98% of precision, recall and F1 score correspondingly.
The DBN model is more precise and reliable than other traditional ML/DL models, with an
accuracy level of 96.78% in predicting individuals with and without heart diseases. Figure 6
depicts the performance comparison of the baseline ML/DL models.
Furthermore, the performance of the baseline models, along with various optimization
algorithms, is analyzed, and the corresponding confusion matrix is presented in Fig. 7. The
optimization algorithms such as particle swarn optimization (PSO), genetic algorithm
(GA), grey wolf optimization (GWO), cuckoo search optimization (CSO), crow search
algorithm (CSA) and seagull optimization algorithm (SOA) are employed to optimize the
parameters of the traditional ML/DL algorithms. The obtained values of various
performance metrics are shown in Table 4. It can be seen that the performance of the SVM
model optimized by PSO, the RF model optimized by GA and the DT model optimized by
GWO algorithm are quite close to each other with accuracy levels of 93.89%, 94.12% and
94.36% respectively. This is because the total true positives and true negatives predicted by
Figure 5 Confusion matrix of ML and DL techniques.
Full-size

DOI: 10.7717/peerj-cs.2498/ﬁg-5
Banumathy et al. (2024), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.2498
21/31

these models are the same, with slight variations in the number of false positives as well as
false negatives forecasted by these models.
It is also evident that the FCN and CSA combination produces the lowest accuracy of
92.78% with a precision of 91.23%, recall of 90.45%, and F1 score of 91.15%. MLP model
optimized by the CSA technique produced a better accuracy of 95.24% with precision,
recall, and F1 score values of 94.52%, 93.14%, and 94.16%, respectively.
Table 2 Attribute correlation description
Attribute
Correlation level
Correlated attribute
Age
Positively correlated
trestbps (0.29), chol (0.20), and ca (0.36)
Negatively correlated
thalach (−0.39)
Sex
Negatively correlated
thalach (−0.34)
Slight positive correlations
cp (0.11) and ca (0.09)
Chest pain
Positively correlated
thalach (0.38), exang (0.38), oldpeak (0.29), slope (0.25), and thal (0.37), target (0.41)
Resting blood pressure
Positively correlated
age (0.29) and chol (0.13)
Negatively correlated
thalach (−0.07)
Cholesterol
Positively correlated
age (0.20), trestbps (0.13), and ca (0.15)
Slightly negatively correlated
fbs (−0.20)
Fasting blood sugar
Negatively correlated
chol (−0.20) and slope (−0.16)
Slight positive correlation
restecg (0.06)
Resting ECG
Slightly negatively correlated
chol (−0.07) and oldpeak (−0.05)
Maximum heart rate
Strongly negatively correlated
age (−0.39) and trestbps (−0.34)
Positively correlated
cp (0.38) and slope (0.25)
Exercise induced angina
Positively correlated
cp (0.38), oldpeak (0.29), and ca (0.15)
Strong negative correlation
thalach (−0.38)
ST depression
Positively correlated
cp (0.29), exang (0.29), and slope (0.58)
Negatively correlated
thalach (−0.35)
ST slope
Positively correlated
cp (0.25), oldpeak (0.58), and target (0.33)
Number of major vessels
Positively correlated
age (0.36), chol (0.15), thal (0.37) and target (0.46)
Thalassemia
Positively correlated
cp (0.37), exang (0.26), ca (0.37) and target (0.52)
Table 3 Performance comparison of ML and DL techniques for cardiovascular disease prediction.
Techniques
Accuracy (%)
Precision (%)
Recall (%)
F1 Score (%)
SVM
92.35
91.32
90.53
91.75
RF
83.21
82.36
81.65
82.95
DT
81.52
79.63
78.35
80.62
MLP
93.25
92.45
91.36
92.86
FCN
94.51
93.31
91.64
92.98
DBN
96.78
95.46
93.98
95.12
Banumathy et al. (2024), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.2498
22/31

Figure 7 Confusion matrix of optimized ML and DL techniques.
Full-size

DOI: 10.7717/peerj-cs.2498/ﬁg-7
Figure 6 Performance comparison of ML/DL techniques.
Full-size

DOI: 10.7717/peerj-cs.2498/ﬁg-6
Banumathy et al. (2024), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.2498
23/31

DBN model optimized by QISOA produces an accuracy of 98.6%, precision of 97.6%,
recall of 96.8% and F1 score of 97.1%. It has been observed that the optimized DBN model
produces performance superior to other baseline models that are optimized using several
optimization algorithms. The graphical depictions of the achieved outcomes are presented
in Fig. 8.
Table 5 shows the performance of the proposed QISOA-DBN model, which is
compared against a few existing works in the literature that focus on cardiovascular disease
classiﬁcation using quantum-based ML/DL or optimization methods. The work proposed
in Nandy et al. (2023) uses a swarm artiﬁcial neural network to predict heart diseases with
an accuracy of 91.6%, precision of 90.9%, recall of 90.1% and F1 score of 90.4%. The
researchers in Ullah et al. (2022) have proposed a fully connected quantum convolutional
neural network to classify individuals with and without heart disease and have achieved an
accuracy of 95.3%. Quantum K-means clustering was suggested as a quantum machine
learning algorithm for heart disease classiﬁcation in Kavitha & Kaulgud (2023), and the
outcomes were found to be 93.5% accurate and precise.
The SVM model was optimized by a quantum-based PSO algorithm in Tharwat &
Hassanien (2019) to produce a better accuracy of 97.6%, which is higher than the DBN
Table 4 Performance comparison of optimized ML and DL techniques.
Techniques
Optimization algorithms
Accuracy (%)
Precision (%)
Recall (%)
F1 Score (%)
SVM
PSO
93.89
92.56
91.35
92.12
RF
GA
94.12
93.45
92.51
93.92
DT
GWO
94.36
93.78
92.85
94.13
MLP
CSO
95.24
94.52
93.14
94.16
FCN
CSA
92.78
91.23
90.45
91.15
DBN
QISOA
98.6
97.6
96.8
97.1
Figure 8 Performance comparison of optimized ML/DL techniques.
Full-size

DOI: 10.7717/peerj-cs.2498/ﬁg-8
Banumathy et al. (2024), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.2498
24/31

model used separately and optimized by the SOA model. However, it was clear that the
QISOA-DBN model produced the highest accuracy of 98.6% in identifying and
categorizing individuals with cardiovascular issues. The proposed model’s precision, recall
and F1-scores were also higher, with values such as 97.6%, 96.8% and 97.1%, respectively.
The performance comparison existing and proposed methods is shown in Fig. 9.
Limitations of present research
The major limitation of the proposed research is that it can be challenging to deploy
resource-intensive models for real-time prediction, particularly in settings with limited
resources. Also, elevated computational capabilities result in ampliﬁed energy usage, which
may constrain extensive or instantaneous applications. In addition to this, DBNs can grow
quite complex and prone to overﬁtting, especially when optimized for high performance.
Table 5 Performance comparison of existing and proposed techniques
References
Techniques
Accuracy
(%)
Precision
(%)
Recall
(%)
F1 Score
(%)
Nandy et al. (2023)
Swarm artiﬁcial neural network
91.6
90.9
90.1
90.4
Ullah et al. (2022)
Fully connected quantum convolutional neural
network
95.3
94.2
93.6
94.2
Kavitha & Kaulgud (2023)
Quantum K-means clustering
93.5
92.2
91.7
92.7
Tharwat & Hassanien (2019)
QPSO-SVM
97.6
96.7
95.6
96.2
Abdulsalam, Meshoul & Shaiba
(2023)
Ensemble-quantum machine learning
96.8
95.3
94.7
96.2
Proposed
QISOA-DBN
98.6
97.6
96.8
97.1
Figure 9 Performance comparison of existing vs proposed techniques.
Full-size

DOI: 10.7717/peerj-cs.2498/ﬁg-9
Banumathy et al. (2024), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.2498
25/31

This is the case if the training data is insufﬁciently vast or heterogeneous. Depending on
the particular disease under investigation, medical data can differ substantially. The
patterns and aspects associated with cardiovascular diseases may not be appropriate for
diseases like cancer or neurological problems. To obtain comparable performance, the
QISOA-DBN model could, therefore, require signiﬁcant retraining and feature
modiﬁcation. Highly complicated data types, including multi-omics data and
histopathology images, are frequently used in cancer diagnosis. Compared to specialized
models created especially for multi-modal medical data, the QISOA-DBN technique may
ﬁnd it challenging to integrate and handle these various data kinds, resulting in inadequate
performance. Genomic and medical imaging data can include extremely high-dimensional
characteristics. Quantum-inspired optimization may not scale well in such cases, resulting
in slower processing times and higher computing costs, even though DBNs can manage
such data to some extent.
CONCLUSION
Research on cardiovascular disease has advanced signiﬁcantly in the last several years.
While much research has been done on cardiac risk detection, most is inefﬁcient and has
numerous shortcomings. The present study proposes using a hybrid model, QISOA-DBN,
to evaluate and classify the risk of heart disease. The advantages of QISOA and DBN
algorithms are combined to improve the efﬁciency of cardiovascular disease prediction.
The ﬁrst phase in the proposed methodology is data preprocessing, which includes
cleaning, transforming, and standardizing data. The second phase incorporates quantum
principles in seagull optimization for a better convergence rate. The third phase employs
the QISOA technique to set the parameter values for the DBN algorithm to enhance its
efﬁcacy in making classiﬁcations. The proposed QISOA-DBN model is applied to the
Cleveland Heart Disease dataset, and the outcomes are compared with the existing works
published in the literature. The suggested approach outperforms other models with
accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 score values of 98.6%, 97.6%, 96.8%, and 97.1%,
respectively. Future research on this work can be focused on examining reinforcement
learning techniques combined with the proposed model to enhance the training of
sequential and dynamic data, enabling it to assess the development of a disease and the
effectiveness of treatment. The subsequent studies should also evaluate the QISOA-DBN
model’s performance on more extensive and varied datasets from various demographics
and healthcare settings to conﬁrm the robustness of the model.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION AND DECLARATIONS
Funding
This work was supported by the Korea Environmental Industry & Technology Institute
(KEITI), with a grant funded by the Korean government, Ministry of Environment (The
development of IoT-based technology for collecting and managing big data on
environmental hazards and health effects), Grant RE202101551. The funders had no role
Banumathy et al. (2024), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.2498
26/31

in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the
manuscript.
Grant Disclosures
The following grant information was disclosed by the authors:
Korea Environmental Industry & Technology Institute (KEITI).
Korean Government, Ministry of Environment: RE202101551.
Competing Interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Author Contributions
. D. Banumathy conceived and designed the experiments, performed the computation
work, prepared ﬁgures and/or tables, authored or reviewed drafts of the article, and
approved the ﬁnal draft.
. T. Vetriselvi conceived and designed the experiments, performed the experiments,
analyzed the data, performed the computation work, prepared ﬁgures and/or tables,
authored or reviewed drafts of the article, and approved the ﬁnal draft.
. K. Venkatachalam conceived and designed the experiments, performed the experiments,
analyzed the data, performed the computation work, prepared ﬁgures and/or tables,
authored or reviewed drafts of the article, and approved the ﬁnal draft.
. Jaehyuk Cho performed the experiments, analyzed the data, prepared ﬁgures and/or
tables, authored or reviewed drafts of the article, and approved the ﬁnal draft.
Data Availability
The following information was supplied regarding data availability:
The Heart Disease dataset is available at UCI Machine Learning Repository: Janosi, A.,
Steinbrunn, W., Pﬁsterer, M., & Detrano, R. (1989). Heart Disease [Dataset]. UCI Machine
Learning Repository. https://doi.org/10.24432/C52P4X.
Supplemental Information
Supplemental information for this article can be found online at http://dx.doi.org/10.7717/
peerj-cs.2498#supplemental-information.
REFERENCES
Abdulsalam G, Meshoul S, Shaiba H. 2023. Explainable heart disease prediction using ensemble-
quantum machine learning approach. Intelligent Automation & Soft Computing 36(1):761–779
DOI 10.32604/iasc.2023.032262.
Agrawal R, Kaur B, Agarwal P. 2021. Quantum inspired particle swarm optimization with guided
exploration for function optimization. Applied Soft Computing 102(1):107122
DOI 10.1016/j.asoc.2021.107122.
Banumathy et al. (2024), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.2498
27/31

Akella A, Akella S. 2021. Machine learning algorithms for predicting coronary artery disease:
efforts toward an open source solution. Future Science OA 7(6):FSO698
DOI 10.2144/fsoa-2020-0206.
Al-Tashi Q, Rais H, Jadid S. 2019. Feature selection method based on grey wolf optimization
for coronary artery disease classiﬁcation. In: Recent Trends in Data Science and Soft
Computing: Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference of Reliable Information and
Communication Technology (IRICT 2018). Berlin, Germany: Springer, 257–266.
Alsubai S, Alqahtani A, Binbusayyis A, Sha M, Gumaei A, Wang S. 2023. Heart failure detection
using instance quantum circuit approach and traditional predictive analysis. Mathematics
11(6):1467 DOI 10.3390/math11061467.
Asif D, Bibi M, Arif MS, Mukheimer A. 2023. Enhancing heart disease prediction through
ensemble learning techniques with hyperparameter optimization. Algorithms 16(6):308
DOI 10.3390/a16060308.
AvinashPrabhu S, Parthipan V. 2022. A novel approach for prediction of human disease using
symptoms by multilayer perceptron algorithm to improve accuracy and compared with k
nearest neighbor algorithm. Journal of Pharmaceutical Negative Results 13:329–335
DOI 10.47750/pnr.2022.13.S04.037.
Bharti R, Khamparia A, Shabaz M, Dhiman G, Pande S, Singh P. 2021. Prediction of heart
disease using a combination of machine learning and deep learning. Computational Intelligence
and Neuroscience 2021(1):8387680 DOI 10.1155/2021/8387680.
Bing P, Liu Y, Liu W, Zhou J, Zhu L. 2022. Electrocardiogram classiﬁcation using TSST-based
spectrogram and ConViT. Frontiers in Cardiovascular Medicine 9:983543
DOI 10.3389/fcvm.2022.983543.
Cai L, Fang H, Xu N, Ren B. 2024. Counterfactual causal-effect intervention for interpretable
medical visual question answering. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 43(12):4430–4441
DOI 10.1109/TMI.2024.3425533.
Chen Z, Liang Q, Wei Z, Chen X, Shi Q, Yu Z, Sun T. 2023. An overview of in vitro biological
neural networks for robot intelligence. Cyborg and Bionic Systems 4(8):0001
DOI 10.34133/cbsystems.0001.
Chicco D, Jurman G. 2020. Machine learning can predict survival of patients with heart failure
from serum creatinine and ejection fraction alone. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision
Making 20(1):1–16 DOI 10.1186/s12911-020-1023-5.
Duan X, Xie D, Zhang R, Li X, Sun J, Qian C, Song X, Li C. 2023. A novel robotic bronchoscope
system for navigation and biopsy of pulmonary lesions. Cyborg and Bionic Systems 4(9):0013
DOI 10.34133/cbsystems.0013.
Enad HG, Mohammed MA. 2023. A review on artiﬁcial intelligence and quantum machine
learning for heart disease diagnosis: current techniques, challenges and issues, recent
developments, and future directions. Fusion: Practice and Applications 11(1):08–25
DOI 10.54216/FPA.110101.
García-Ordás MT, Bayón-Gutiérrez M, Benavides C, Aveleira-Mata J, Benítez-Andrades JA.
2023. Heart disease risk prediction using deep learning techniques with feature augmentation.
Multimedia Tools and Applications 82(20):31759–31773 DOI 10.1007/s11042-023-14817-z.
Ghosh P, Azam S, Jonkman M, Karim A, Shamrat FJM, Ignatious E, Shultana S, Beeravolu AR,
De Boer F. 2021. Efﬁcient prediction of cardiovascular disease using machine learning
algorithms with relief and lasso feature selection techniques. IEEE Access 9:19304–19326
DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3053759.
Banumathy et al. (2024), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.2498
28/31

Huang H-H, Shu J, Liang Y. 2024. MUMA: a multi-omics meta-learning algorithm for data
interpretation and classiﬁcation. IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics
28(4):2428–2436 DOI 10.1109/JBHI.2024.3363081.
Huang Y, Wang C, Zhou T, Xie F, Liu Z, Xu H, Liu M, Wang S, Li L, Chi Q. 2024. Lumican
promotes calciﬁc aortic valve disease through h3 histone lactylation. European Heart Journal
45(37):ehae407 DOI 10.1093/eurheartj/ehae407.
Huo R, Liu Y, Xu H, Li J, Xin R, Xing Z, Deng S, Wang T, Yuan H, Zhao X. 2022. Associations
between carotid atherosclerotic plaque characteristics determined by magnetic resonance
imaging and improvement of cognition in patients undergoing carotid endarterectomy.
Quantitative Imaging in Medicine and Surgery 12(5):2891–2903 DOI 10.21037/qims-21-981.
Kavitha S, Kaulgud N. 2023. Quantum k-means clustering method for detecting heart disease
using quantum circuit approach. Soft Computing 27(18):13255–13268
DOI 10.1007/s00500-022-07200-x.
Kishor A, Chakraborty C. 2022. Artiﬁcial intelligence and internet of things based healthcare 4.0
monitoring system. Wireless Personal Communications 127(2):1615–1631
DOI 10.1007/s11277-021-08708-5.
Kumar Y, Koul A, Sisodia PS, ShaﬁJ, Verma K, Gheisari M, Davoodi MB. 2021. Heart failure
detection using quantum-enhanced machine learning and traditional machine learning
techniques for internet of artiﬁcially intelligent medical things. Wireless Communications and
Mobile Computing 2021(1):1616725 DOI 10.1155/2021/1616725.
Lahori M, Dehghani A, Wilson C, Law W, Agaram N, Murali R, Sigel C. 2023. Cytopathologic
features of epithelioid hemangioendothelioma including touch imprints for rapid on-site
evaluation. Cytojournal 20:29 DOI 10.25259/Cytojournal.
Li Q, You T, Chen J, Zhang Y, Du C. 2023. LI-EMRSQL: linking information enhanced Text2SQL
parsing on complex electronic medical records. IEEE Transactions on Reliability
73(2):1280–1290 DOI 10.1109/TR.2023.3336330.
Luan S, Yu X, Lei S, Ma C, Wang X, Xue X, Ding Y, Ma T, Zhu B. 2023. Deep learning for fast
super-resolution ultrasound microvessel imaging. Physics in Medicine & Biology 68(24):245023
DOI 10.1088/1361-6560/ad0a5a.
Maheshwari D, Ullah U, Marulanda PAO, Jurado AG-O, Gonzalez ID, Merodio JMO, Garcia-
Zapirain B. 2023. Quantum machine learning applied to electronic healthcare records for
ischemic heart disease classiﬁcation. Human-centric Computing and Information Science
13(06):1–17 DOI 10.22967/HCIS.2023.13.006.
Mehmood A, Iqbal M, Mehmood Z, Irtaza A, Nawaz M, Nazir T, Masood M. 2021. Prediction of
heart disease using deep convolutional neural networks. Arabian Journal for Science and
Engineering 46(4):3409–3422 DOI 10.1007/s13369-020-05105-1.
Munshi M, Gupta R, Jadav NK, Polkowski Z, Tanwar S, Alqahtani F, Said W. 2024. Quantum
machine learning-based framework to detect heart failures in healthcare 4.0. Software: Practice
and Experience 54(2):168–185 DOI 10.1002/spe.3264.
Nagarajan SM, Muthukumaran V, Murugesan R, Joseph RB, Meram M, Prathik A. 2022.
Innovative feature selection and classiﬁcation model for heart disease prediction. Journal of
Reliable Intelligent Environments 8(4):333–343 DOI 10.1007/s40860-021-00152-3.
Nandy S, Adhikari M, Balasubramanian V, Menon VG, Li X, Zakarya M. 2023. An intelligent
heart disease prediction system based on swarm-artiﬁcial neural network. Neural Computing
and Applications 35(20):14723–14737 DOI 10.1007/s00521-021-06124-1.
Banumathy et al. (2024), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.2498
29/31

Ozpolat Z, Karabatak M. 2023. Performance evaluation of quantum-based machine learning
algorithms for cardiac arrhythmia classiﬁcation. Diagnostics 13(6):1099
DOI 10.3390/diagnostics13061099.
Priya L, VinilaJinny S, Mate Y. 2020. Early prediction model for coronary heart disease using
genetic algorithms, hyper-parameter optimization and machine learning techniques. Health
Technology 11:63–73.
Rao JN, Prasad RS. 2021. An enhanced novel dynamic data processing (enddp) algorithm for
predicting heart disease in machine learning. International Journal of Scientiﬁc Research in
Computer Science, Engineering and Information Technology 7:2456–3307
DOI 10.32628/IJSRCSEIT.
Reddy KVV, Elamvazuthi I, Aziz AA, Paramasivam S, Chua HN, Pranavanand S. 2021. Heart
disease risk prediction using machine learning classiﬁers with attribute evaluators. Applied
Sciences 11(18):8352 DOI 10.3390/app11188352.
Saad HM, Chakrabortty RK, Elsayed S, Ryan MJ. 2021. Quantum-inspired genetic algorithm for
resource-constrained project-scheduling. IEEE Access 9:38488–38502
DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3062790.
Sarra RR, Dinar AM, Mohammed MA, Ghani MKA, Albahar MA. 2022. A robust framework for
data generative and heart disease prediction based on efﬁcient deep learning models. Diagnostics
12(12):2899 DOI 10.3390/diagnostics12122899.
Sharma P, Sharma K. 2022. A novel quantum-inspired binary bat algorithm for leukocytes
classiﬁcation in blood smear. Expert Systems 39(3):e12813 DOI 10.1111/exsy.12813.
Sun T, Lv J, Zhao X, Li W, Zhang Z, Nie L. 2023. In vivo liver function reserve assessments in
alcoholic liver disease by scalable photoacoustic imaging. Photoacoustics 34(8):100569
DOI 10.1016/j.pacs.2023.100569.
Tharwat A, Hassanien AE. 2018. Chaotic antlion algorithm for parameter optimization of support
vector machine. Applied Intelligence 48(3):670–686 DOI 10.1007/s10489-017-0994-0.
Tharwat A, Hassanien AE. 2019. Quantum-behaved particle swarm optimization for parameter
optimization of support vector machine. Journal of Classiﬁcation 36(3):576–598
DOI 10.1007/s00357-018-9299-1.
Ullah U, Jurado AGO, Gonzalez ID, Garcia-Zapirain B. 2022. A fully connected quantum
convolutional neural network for classifying ischemic cardiopathy. IEEE Access 10(2):134592–
134605 DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3232307.
Wang J, Rao C, Goh M, Xiao X. 2023a. Risk assessment of coronary heart disease based on cloud-
random forest. Artiﬁcial Intelligence Review 56(1):203–232 DOI 10.1007/s10462-022-10170-z.
Wang Y, Wang W. 2021. Quantum-inspired differential evolution with grey wolf optimizer for 0-1
knapsack problem. Mathematics 9(11):1233 DOI 10.3390/math9111233.
Wang Y, Zhai W, Zhang H, Cheng S, Li J. 2023b. Injectable polyzwitterionic lubricant for
complete prevention of cardiac adhesion. Macromolecular Bioscience 23(4):2200554
DOI 10.1002/mabi.202200554.
Yildirim O, Baloglu UB, Talo M, Ganesan P, Tung JS, Kang G, Tooley J, Alhusseini MI,
Baykaner T, Wang PJ. 2021. Deep neural network trained on surface ECG improves diagnostic
accuracy of prior myocardial infarction over Q wave analysis. In: 2021 Computing in Cardiology
(CinC). Piscataway: IEEE, 1–4 DOI 10.23919/CinC53138.2021.9662825.
Yu X, Luan S, Lei S, Huang J, Liu Z, Xue X, Ma T, Ding Y, Zhu B. 2023. Deep learning for fast
denoising ﬁltering in ultrasound localization microscopy. Physics in Medicine & Biology
68(20):205002 DOI 10.1088/1361-6560/acf98f.
Banumathy et al. (2024), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.2498
30/31

Zhang C, Ge H, Zhang S, Liu D, Jiang Z, Lan C, Li L, Feng H, Hu R. 2021. Hematoma evacuation
via image-guided para-corticospinal tract approach in patients with spontaneous intracerebral
hemorrhage. Neurology and Therapy 10(2):1001–1013 DOI 10.1007/s40120-021-00279-8.
Zhao Y, Hu J, Sun X, Yang K, Yang L, Kong L, Zhang B, Li F, Li C, Shi B. 2021. Loss of m6A
demethylase ALKBH5 promotes post-ischemic angiogenesis via post-transcriptional
stabilization of WNT5A. Clinical and Translational Medicine 11(5):e402
DOI 10.1002/ctm2.402.
Zhao Y, Xiong W, Li C, Zhao R, Lu H, Song S, Zhou Y, Hu Y, Shi B, Ge J. 2023. Hypoxia-
induced signaling in the cardiovascular system: pathogenesis and therapeutic targets. Signal
Transduction and Targeted Therapy 8(1):431 DOI 10.1038/s41392-023-01652-9.
Zhou X, Lu J, Wu B, Guo Z. 2022. HOXA11-AS facilitates the proliferation, cell cycle process and
migration of keloid ﬁbroblasts through sponging miR-188–5p to regulate VEGFA. Journal of
Dermatological Science 106(2):111–118 DOI 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2022.04.004.
Banumathy et al. (2024), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.2498
31/31
