Source-PDF: D:\Review\New folder\Main\Core quantumbiomed + health relevance\Quantum computing at the frontiers of biological sciences.pdf
Relative-Path: New folder\Main\Core quantumbiomed + health relevance\Quantum computing at the frontiers of biological sciences.pdf
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Quantum computing at the frontiers of biological sciences
Prashant S. Emani1,2,27, Jonathan Warrell1,2,27, Alan Anticevic3, Stefan Bekiranov4, Michael 
Gandal5, Michael J. McConnell6, Guillermo Sapiro7, Alán Aspuru-Guzik8,9,10,11, Justin T. 
Baker12,13, Matteo Bastiani14,15, John D. Murray16,17, Stamatios N. Sotiropoulos14,18, Jacob 
Taylor19,20, Geetha Senthil21, Thomas Lehner21,22,26,✉, Mark B. Gerstein1,2,23,24,✉, Aram W. 
Harrow25,✉
1Program in Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA.
2Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA.
3Yale School of Medicine, Department of Psychiatry, New Haven, CT, USA.
4Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Virginia School of Medicine, 
Charlottesville, VA, USA.
5Department of Psychiatry, Semel Institute, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California–Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
6Lieber Institute for Brain Development, Baltimore, MD, USA.
7Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.
8Department of Chemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
9Canadian Institute for Advanced Research (CIFAR) Artificial Intelligence Research Chair, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
10Vector Institute, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
11Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
12Institute for Technology in Psychiatry, McLean Hospital, Belmont, MA, USA.
13Department of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
✉ tlehner@gmail.com; mark@gersteinlab.org; aram@mit.edu.
Author contributions
All authors contributed to discussions on the design of the manuscript. G. Senthil and T.L. led the NIMH workshop and subsequent 
discussions. P.S.E., J.W., A.A., S.B., M.G., M.J.M., J.T.B., M.B.G. and A.W.H wrote the manuscript. P.S.E., J.W., A.A., S.B., M.G., 
M.J.M., G. Sapiro, A.A.-G., J.D.M., J.T.B., M.B., S.N.S., G. Senthil, T.L., M.B.G. and A.W.H edited the manuscript. A.W.H. and S.B. 
contributed to the “Classical versus quantum circuits: state of the art” section. P.S.E., J.W., S.B., M.G., M.J.M., M.B.G. contributed 
content to the “Sequence analysis,” “Genetics,” “Functional genomics” and “Integration across disciplines” subsections, and A.A., G. 
Sapiro, J.T.B., J.W. and J.M. to the “Mapping neurobehavioral variation via neuroimaging and deep phenotyping” subsection. S.B. 
contributed to the Epilogue section.
Competing interests
A.A. serves as a member of the Scientific Advisory Board of, consults for, has received grants from, and holds equity in BlackThorn 
Therapeutics. G. Sapiro consulted for Apple, Volvo, Restore3D and SIS, and has received speaking fees from Johnson & Johnson. 
J.T.B. has received consulting fees from BlackThorn Therapeutics, Niraxx Therapeutics, Verily Life Sciences, AbleTo Inc. and Pear 
Therapeutics, and has received consulting fees and equity from Mindstrong Inc. J.D.M. consults for, has received grants from, and 
holds equity in BlackThorn Therapeutics. A.W.H. has recently joined the Scientific Advisory Board of Zapata Computing, from which 
he expects income and equity.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 July 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Methods. 2021 July ; 18(7): 701–709. doi:10.1038/s41592-020-01004-3.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

14Sir Peter Mansfield Imaging Centre, School of Medicine, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, 
UK.
15Wellcome Centre for Integrative Neuroimaging, FMRIB Centre, Nuffield Department of Clinical 
Neurosciences, University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK.
16Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
17Department of Physics, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA.
18NIHR Nottingham Biomedical Research Centre, Queen’s Medical Centre, Nottingham University 
Hospitals NHS Trust, Nottingham, UK.
19Joint Center for Quantum Information and Computer Science, University of Maryland, College 
Park, MD, USA.
20National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD, USA.
21New York Genome Center, New York, NY, USA.
22National Institute of Mental Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
23Department of Computer Science, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA.
24Department of Statistics and Data Science, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA.
25Center for Theoretical Physics, Department of Physics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA, USA.
26Present address: Neuropsychiatric Disease Genomics, New York Genome Center, New York, 
NY, USA.
27These authors contributed equally: Prashant S. Emani, Jonathan Warrell.
Abstract
Computing plays a critical role in the biological sciences but faces increasing challenges of scale 
and complexity. Quantum computing, a computational paradigm exploiting the unique properties 
of quantum mechanical analogs of classical bits, seeks to address many of these challenges. We 
discuss the potential for quantum computing to aid in the merging of insights across different areas 
of biological sciences.
Understanding complex biological phenomena has required concurrent advances in 
experiment, theory and computing power. The increasing need for computing infrastructure 
has led to expansions of current supercomputing and other massively parallel computing 
facilities, but also considerations of entirely new computing paradigms. Here we consider 
the potential of quantum computing (QC) to address complex biological questions. QC is an 
approach to computation in which an algorithm is defined by a series of operations on 
quantum states that results in a solution to a problem. Recent technological developments 
have carried QC capabilities from the realm of academic exploration to commercial 
opportunities1,2. While the scale is not yet competitive with classical technologies, there is 
substantial excitement in its eventual promise, and we hope to provide an entry point for 
biologists to certain aspects of the discussion surrounding QC. This effort is especially 
Emani et al.
Page 2
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

timely given recent policy efforts at a national or international level, such as the US National 
Quantum Initiative Act of 20183 (the implementation of a National Quantum Initiative for 
quantum information science and technology4), the European Quantum Technologies 
Flagship, and efforts in the United Kingdom and China5.
We first present a primer on quantum computation to familiarize the reader with the basic 
concepts and language of QC. The remainder is focused on the study of the human brain 
through genetics, genomics, neuroimaging and deep behavioral phenotyping, a 
multidisciplinary effort that falls under the term “convergent neuroscience.” We highlight 
these areas as they exemplify two sources of complexity: separately, each field presents a 
rich set of problems that often push the limits of classical computational capability; in 
combination, they offer a multiscale challenge leading from the molecular scale through the 
cellular and tissue levels to brain architecture and, eventually, to complex human behaviors 
and disorders. The study of the emergent properties of the brain, such as cognition and 
behavior, is a uniquely challenging multilevel endeavor that demands pioneering approaches 
in computation. Accordingly, we discuss how quantum algorithms that map onto 
methodological issues in the biological sciences may provide much needed improvements in 
computational efficiency, and we posit open questions for eventual development of new 
computational solutions.
Classical versus quantum circuits: state of the art
Quantum computing uses the laws of quantum mechanics to perform computations. 
Quantum mechanics is the physical theory that governs all matter but is particularly relevant 
at the molecular scale and below. It states that particles have wave-like properties and waves 
have particle-like properties. If a quantum computer could be built, then this wave-like 
behavior could be harnessed for computational benefit: in a conventional (classical) 
computer using randomness, different random choices can lead to different outcomes, and 
the total probability of an outcome is the sum of the probabilities of each computational path 
leading to that outcome; by contrast, a quantum computer can have complex amplitudes 
along computational paths, just as a wave can have different amplitudes in different modes. 
Measuring will ‘collapse’ the state and yield a specific outcome with probability equal to the 
squared absolute value of the amplitude. Thus, quantum computers promise a new form of 
computing that would be qualitatively different from any previous (classical) form of 
computation by allowing interference between computational paths, analogous to the 
interference between waves6. While quantum computers are technically more difficult to 
build, and the best current general-purpose quantum computers have only 50–100 qubits, 
they can solve some problems in a time that grows more slowly as a function of the input 
size than classical computation. The term “qubit” refers to a quantum two-level system, such 
as a photon that can travel down one of two optical fibers. Qubits can be thought of as a 
generalization of classical bits (cbits): cbits can be in states 0 or 1, while the state of a single 
qubit is described by complex numbers α0 and α1 satisfying |α0|2 + |α1|2 = 1. The power of 
quantum computers comes from scaling. A system of n cbits can be in one of 2n possible 
states at any time, while the state of n qubits is described by a complex unit vector of 
dimension 2n (Fig. 1a,b). These vectors (also called wavevectors or wavefunctions) can be 
transformed by multiplying them by unitary matrices, and in many cases this can be done 
Emani et al.
Page 3
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

efficiently. For example, the wavevector can be Fourier transformed using O n2  elementary 
quantum gates. However, not all I transformations can be done efficiently. The laws of 
quantum measurement also limit the amount of information that can be extracted from a 
quantum state. A full measurement of the state yields outcome x with probability |αx|2, 
destroying the state in the process. Thus, even though describing the quantum state of n 
qubits requires an amount of information that scales exponentially with n, measurement can 
only extract n bits of information. Finding a way to benefit from the exponential state space 
of quantum computers despite this limitation and others is the central challenge of quantum 
algorithm design7.
The challenges in building quantum hardware and mitigating noise are considerable and are 
not addressed in this paper, since our focus is principally on algorithm development and 
potential biological applications. Large-scale quantum computers are likely to rely on error-
correcting codes and other error mitigation strategies that will result in additional overhead; 
for example, needing to use many physical qubits to store one logical qubit. However, 
quantum algorithms can be built out of a universal set of quantum gates in a way that does 
not depend on the underlying hardware, just like classical algorithms.
Given the ubiquity of classical computers, the natural way to understand the strengths of 
quantum computers is by comparing their run-time scaling with that of the best-known 
classical algorithms. In some cases, these speedups are exponential: a quantum computer 
with a few thousand error-corrected qubits could factor numbers that could not be factored 
using existing classical computers and currently known algorithms in time less than the age 
of the universe. In other cases, provable polynomial speedups are known: for example, given 
the ability to compute a function f(x) where x takes on N values, a quantum computer can 
find the minimum value of f(x) in only O
N  evaluations of f(x) while a classical computer 
would require O N  steps (assuming that f(x) has no other structure we can exploit)8. By 
contrast, for some problems, quantum computers are known to be no stronger than classical 
computers. And in many other cases, plausible heuristic algorithms have been proposed for 
quantum computers, whose performance is only incompletely understood.
The source of quantum speedup.
There is not a simple description of what accounts for speedups, although the most plausible 
explanation is the difference between interference of amplitudes and addition of 
probabilities. For example, a qubit can have states |0〉I and |1〉, which correspond to cbit 
values 0 and 1 and, in the representation of Fig. 1a, are the north and south poles. Qubits can 
also be in superpositions (see Box 1) such as 0 + 1
2
 and 0 −1
2
, which lie on the equator in 
the figure; these correspond to having amplitude 1
2 in the |0〉 state and amplitude ±1
2  in the |
1〉 state. To see that these differ from each other, and also from a random mixture of |0〉 and |
1〉 consider the NOT gate, which maps |0〉 and |1〉 to 0 + 1
2
 and 0 −1
2
, respectively. 
Starting with the |0〉 state, applying NOT once yields 0 + 1
2
. This state could be thought of 
as analogous to a random mixture of 0 and 1, as we would expect if NOT means applying 
Emani et al.
Page 4
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

NOT with probability one-half. However, applying NOT twice yields |1〉, just as we would 
expect from a NOT gate, whereas applying the randomized version twice would yield the 
same uniform mixture of 0 and 1. More generally, quantum computers and randomized 
computers can both be thought of as taking different paths through the 2n possible bit 
strings, but for randomized computers we sum the non-negative-valued probabilities of these 
paths to get the final output distribution, while for quantum computers we sum the complex-
valued amplitudes of these paths. Adding complex numbers of roughly the same phase (for 
example, 1 + 1) corresponds to constructive interference while adding ones of opposite 
phases (for example, 1 + (–1)) corresponds to destructive interference, analogous to the way 
that light and other waves can exhibit interference.
While we often do not know how to take advantage of the rich possibilities offered by 
quantum interference, in some cases we can use them to achieve asymptotic speedups. 
Algorithms like Grover’s unstructured search algorithm9 are simple examples of this. 
Grover’s algorithm takes a subroutine with a small success probability p, which would need 
to be repeated O 1/p  times on a classical computer to obtain a successful outcome, and 
obtains an answer on a quantum computer using only O 1/ p  repetitions. This makes use of 
the fact that probabilities are obtained by taking the square of quantum amplitudes. The 
quantum Fourier transform (used in period finding and Shor’s factoring algorithm; Fig. 1c) 
is a more sophisticated example of how complex-weighted transitions can be useful, and in 
some cases this can give rise to exponential speedups. By contrast, some problems are 
known to not admit any quantum speedup: for example, finding the parity of N numbers 
requires time O N  on either a quantum or classical computer10. It is a major open research 
problem to determine when quantum speedup does or does not exist, and it is unlikely to 
ever be fully resolved, just as there is still no single theorem describing which problems can 
be solved by efficient classical algorithms. We next discuss some examples of potential 
quantum speedups.
Exponential speedup.
The main exponential speedups known are for code breaking (dramatic but unlikely to be 
relevant here) and quantum simulation of molecules or other large quantum systems. If the 
properties of a molecule are not well captured by simple classical approximations, then there 
is a good case to be made for using Ia quantum computer to make a better-quality 
approximation computationally tractable. The advantage of a quantum computer here arises 
from the exponentially growing dimension of quantum states. As a result, some promising 
cases for quantum advantage involve molecules with large numbers of active electrons, such 
as organometallic compounds11.
Polynomial speedup.
Typical polynomial speedups can be thought of as direct improvements of some classical 
algorithms. The best known of these is Grover’s square-root search speedup, described 
above12. Other, more sophisticated algorithms also admit provably quadratic improvements. 
For example, a classical algorithm might search over a tree of possibilities in a manner that 
can improve over brute-force search by sometimes being able to quickly prune entire 
subtrees. Such searches can also be quadratically improved quantumly; that is, if the 
Emani et al.
Page 5
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

classical search process explores N nodes, then the quantum algorithm requires effort 
roughly equal to N times the effort to evaluate one node13. The strength of these algorithms 
is that they I apply under very general conditions, such as needing to minimize an easily 
computable function. They also do not usually need more qubits than are already needed to 
compute the function.
Heuristic speedups.
Many of the most important algorithms for classical computers either lack formal proofs of 
correctness or are often run outside of the regime in which these proofs of correctness apply. 
These include Markov chain Monte Carlo (where rigorous upper bounds on mixing time are 
usually not known) and gradient descent applied to non-convex problems such as deep 
neural networks. For quantum computers, heuristic algorithms include adiabatic 
optimization14 — or, more generally, quantum annealing (QA)15 — and the quantum 
approximate optimization algorithm (QAOA)16. The level of speedup provided by these 
algorithms over classical algorithms is in general unknown. It is expected that as quantum 
computers are built, our understanding of the performance of these heuristics will improve, 
just as much of our understanding of the performance of classical heuristics comes from 
empirical evidence and not only theory. In the following sections, we refer to this class of 
methods as “quantum heuristics.”
Interfacing with classical algorithms.
There is an important caveat about quantum algorithms. Suppose for concreteness that we 
are minimizing a function f(x). For a speedup, a quantum computer would need to interfere 
computational paths that compute f(x) for different values of x. If information about the 
value of x leaked to an outside classical system, then this would prevent those paths from 
coherently interfering, and we would be left with f(x) for a random choice of x. This would 
limit its ability to share the computation with a classical computer. Suppose, for example, 
that the evaluation of f(x) were a memory- and time-intensive calculation for which quantum 
speedups were not known. Then using quantum computers to improve the minimization of f 
would need to use qubits to perform this evaluation and could not offload the computation to 
a classical computer. This means that the overall speedup would be less than quadratic.
Big data and quantum RAM.
A related limitation of current models of quantum computers is that they cannot access large 
classical datasets in superposition; attempting to do so would amount to measuring the qubit 
register containing the address being queried, which would collapse any superposition there 
into a random mixture. This means that quantum computers may be able to speed up 
complicated calculations on small datasets (for example, finding the best Bayesian network) 
but have less advantage in solving problems on large datasets. One way to address this is 
with filtering or data-reduction techniques, which select a small but hopefully representative 
sample of the data and use that as input to the optimization problem17. Or the quantum 
computer could be used for ‘small data’ problems where the difficulty comes from the 
complexity of the analysis. A more speculative possibility is a quantum hardware solution 
known as a qRAM (quantum RAM)18, which would give a quantum computer the ability to 
Emani et al.
Page 6
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

coherently query a large classical dataset as a superposition of qubits: a superposition of 
input memory addresses would yield an output consisting of a superposition of memory cell 
contents (see Box 2). A qRAM would enable powerful quantum algorithmic primitives18, 
but there are no proposals for scalable error-corrected qRAM, and it is not clear whether it 
would ultimately be easier than making a large quantum computer19.
Potential applications for quantum computing in biology Sequence analysis.
We first consider QC algorithms implementable on near-term quantum processors. An 
essential initial step in genetics and genomics is the matching of sequences of nucleotides 
and amino acids to organism databases and, more specifically, the mapping of sequencing 
reads from experimental assays to reference genomes. Any approach needs to contend with 
both memory (holding a representation of the reference and information on the mapping) 
and speed concerns. Dynamic programming methods, such as the Smith–Waterman 
algorithm20, enable queries of sequence strings against immense databases and could be cast 
as hidden Markov models (HMMs). The recent development of hidden quantum Markov 
models (HQMMs)21,22 opens the possibility of simulating classical HMMs on available 
quantum circuits22, as well as extending model space beyond classical HMMs21. In fact, the 
potential advantage of HQMMs stems from this extension of the model space to yield more 
efficient representations of sequence generators21. However, it is unclear how and to what 
extent this increased efficiency would translate into speedups. Hybrid approaches are 
attractive prospects: the iteration through hyperparameter space in HMMs could be classical, 
with quantum optimization of the maximal trajectory through state space. Given that 
dynamic programming methods have mostly been supplanted by the approximate but faster 
k-mer-based BLAST algorithm20 for database searches, a QC-based improvement in 
efficiency could reopen the case for their utility.
We next explore problems whose QC solutions may depend on the availability and storage in 
memory of superpositions of qubits (qRAM). For genomic read mapping, state-of-the-art 
classical algorithms include the exploitation of the Burrows–Wheeler transform to efficiently 
perform DNA sequence alignments23, and seed-based approaches to map RNA reads to exon 
boundaries separated by large genomic distances24. Both methods rely on lexicographically 
sorted suffixes constructed from the reference genome, followed by scanning for matches of 
the query read. The classical complexity of sequence matching depends on whether exact 
O n + m ; n = length of reference sequence, m = query read length) or inexact matches 
O nm , including gaps, are considered. Grover’s-algorithm-based improvements in string-
matching speeds25 could be exploited O
n +
m  for exact matches) to aid the scanning 
process. Recent work has demonstrated the potential for even further QC speed gains under 
the assumption of unique membership of a query string within a reference database26. The 
scaling of the problem is such that a reduction in complexity of even simpler mapping 
problems would be highly beneficial, although the need to generate superpositions of the 
entire reference string also creates potential problems: given the need to store a large 
reference database in superposition, the current lack of qRAM is an issue. Furthermore, 
speed gains from Grover’s-algorithm-based methods could be reduced by the cost of 
evaluating the function being searched, if done classically.
Emani et al.
Page 7
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Genetics.
As in the previous section, a possible problem for near-term QC algorithms to tackle is the 
imputation of individual-specific mutations, especially single-nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs). Given shared sets of haplotypes across subpopulations, a relatively sparse set of 
SNPs can be expanded by inferring additional SNPs that co-occur with the original set with 
high probability. This imputation usually involves an HMM-based likelihood 
maximization27, which could be cast as HQMMs.
While imputation depends on inherited SNPs within populations (germline mutations), cells 
also contain postconception de novo variants, called “somatic variants.” Every neuron in the 
human brain is likely to contain private somatic variants, including single-nucleotide 
variants and large structural variants that alter allelic diversity for dozens of genes. 
Identifying their functional impact is essential. Machine-learning classifiers have been 
trained on case–control datasets to identify psychiatric-disorder-associated variants28. 
However, given the high-dimensional parameter search space for the classification problem, 
classical computation frequently runs into search efficiency issues. These issues might be 
ameliorated using near-term implementable QC machine learning methods29, discussed at 
length in subsequent subsections.
Another important category of genetic analyses is the construction of optimal trees that 
describe the relative proximity of genetic sequences, including ancestral recombination 
graphs (ARGs)30, depicting ancestral relationships between individual genomes while 
accounting for genetic recombination; pathogen evolutionary trees in epidemiological 
studies; and tumor cell mutational lineages, as could be relevant to malignancy and medical 
response. Tree reconstruction algorithms optimize across the similarity constraints between 
genomic segments, mainly involving sampling from the space of possible genealogies with 
heuristics and simplifications31. For smaller input sequence sets, the massive tree-search 
space makes this an open candidate problem for speedup using available quantum heuristic 
optimization methods14–16.
SNP association and heritability analyses are problematic for near-term quantum 
approaches, given the need to manipulate large matrices to solve systems of linear equations. 
In association studies, SNPs can be statistically associated with individual-level phenotypes 
in genome-wide association studies (GWAS) or to quantitative molecular traits (cell or tissue 
gene expression, methylation, epigenetic markers, cell fractions) and other quantitative traits 
(loci designated as QTLs). The evaluation of total SNP heritability often involves linear 
mixed effects models, with genetic variance estimations carried out through techniques such 
as the restricted maximum likelihood (REML) method32. With qRAM, algorithms such as 
quantum least squares33,34 could offer up to exponential speedups through the ability to 
perform fast linear-algebraic operations, under certain assumptions of sparseness and 
condition number, although it is unclear to what extent any advantages would be undercut by 
the time cost of querying the qRAM. For lower-dimensional regression problems, there is 
some potential for near-term quantum heuristic optimizers to tackle these tasks35.
Emani et al.
Page 8
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Functional genomics.
The chain of factors that leads from genetic variation to higher-level behaviors such as 
cognitive traits includes complex intermediate links, such as the molecular regulatory 
framework within cells, cell-to-cell interactions, heterogeneity in cellular composition and 
behavior in tissues, and inter-regional connectivity patterns in the brain, among many others 
(Fig. 2). These factors are further governed by complex developmental processes and gene–
environment interactions in an individual-specific manner. Despite this complexity, recent 
studies have shown that genetic risk for particular traits can be partitioned across 
‘intermediate’ phenotypes, such as gene expression or chromatin binding profiles; a direct 
approach to such analysis is to impute intermediate molecular phenotypes first and then link 
the imputed phenotypes to high-level traits36. However, intermediate molecular phenotypes 
are typically high dimensional and interdependent; for example, bulk transcriptome 
expression profiles can be ~22,000 dimensional. Possible models that can learn joint 
probability distributions over such levels of analyses include Bayesian networks, undirected 
models such as Boltzmann machines37, and recent deep-learning approaches such as 
variational autoencoder (VAEs). Exact optimization of such models, however, is intractable: 
structure learning in Bayesian networks requires optimization over a search space of all 
directed acyclic graphs, which is super-exponential O n!2
n!
2! n −2 ! , where n is the 
dimensionality38). Inference in Boltzmann machines requires a search over O 2n  states after 
binarization to calculate a gradient, and training VAEs requires the optimization of a non-
convex objective function. Such problems may be potential candidates for quantum 
approaches: for smaller input sizes, near-term approaches without qRAM may be developed 
to perform exact searches across the space of Bayesian networks, while for moderate-sized 
problems, approximate quantum analogs of Boltzmann machines (QBMs) and VAEs 
(QVAEs) have been tested in simulation and experimentally39,40, with the optimization 
being conducted through QA. We note also that, for all these models, prior knowledge of 
molecular interactions may be used during training to suggest causal network 
interpretations.
In contrast to direct imputation of molecular phenotypes, intermediate phenotypes may be 
derived at the level of sets of genes (such as functional pathways) and cell-type proportions. 
For instance, weighted gene correlation network analysis (WGCNA) performs a version of 
hierarchical clustering to derive coexpression modules, which are enriched in gene 
pathways41, and non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) based on marker gene profiles can 
be used to decompose bulk transcriptome data into components corresponding to cell-type 
fractions37. Exact optimization of these models is again intractable; exact hierarchical 
clustering would require a search over a large space of trees, and NMF is a non-convex 
optimization problem. The former may be a candidate for an exact quantum solution for 
small-scale problems while both may benefit from quantum heuristic approaches (a QA 
approach to NMF is found in ref. 42, and quantum speedups for approximate clustering are 
described in ref. 17). While clustering ~1,000 to ~20,000 features is common in genomics, 
there are a number of applications where a relatively small number of features, ~100, are 
clustered across samples (for example, protein-array data). Clustering associated with global 
minimization of objective functions is of great interest in these small-feature-number cases. 
Emani et al.
Page 9
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

More generally, comparison of clusters (and solutions to other genomic algorithms) derived 
from exact and approximate greedy minimization would inform the nature of the errors 
associated with applying greedy algorithms to large numbers of features and samples, as 
well as suggest possible approaches to improving the greedy algorithms in the short term. 
Application of these methods at full genomic scale, however, would require further technical 
developments in qRAM or quantum processor size.
Mapping neurobehavioral variation via neuroimaging and deep phenotyping.
The overarching goal of convergent neuroscience is to link cellular-level mechanisms to 
system-level observations and ultimately behavior. Multimodal neuroimaging provides rich 
high-dimensional data that can map neural and behavioral mechanisms in humans. While 
many quantitative optimizations remain, one of the core challenges is accurate identification 
and alignment across people of brain anatomy to reference atlases. For instance, one 
widespread approach implemented in FreeSurfer software43 employs a sequence of 
registration steps involving the minimization of an energy function over the spatial 
transformation field. Here, potential quantum heuristic approaches could be brought to bear 
for images of moderate resolution if the corresponding energy function (Hamiltonian) can be 
mapped to an Ising-type model. A related challenge involves training statistical models to 
rapidly and accurately quantify neurobehavioral variation. For instance, the presence of 
active psychotic symptoms in previously unseen individuals diagnosed with schizophrenia 
and bipolar illness can be predicted using dynamic functional connectome features derived 
from fMRI44. Quantum analogs (such as HQMMs21,22; see “Sequence analysis” and 
“Genetics”) may help train such predictive models more efficiently.
Computational neuroscience has used circuit models to inform and constrain experimental 
observations. Dynamical neural models operate at the local circuit or global level and use 
parameterizations based on known constraints (for example, biophysical parameters) or 
learned de novo. Local and global neural dynamics are typically highly nonlinear, producing 
difficult optimization problems in the case of parametric model fitting45 and requiring a rich 
model class for de novo learning methods. Fluctuations at equilibrium exhibit complex 
interdependencies. Furthermore, the hierarchical relationships between genetics, anatomy, 
function and the equilibrium connectivity neural state are, in general, highly nonlinear and 
only partially captured by available computational models. Current classical models relate 
such simulations to equilibrium distribution features (or to resting state characteristics) — 
for instance, Ising models and second-order mean-field regional models of resting-state 
fMRI observations46,47. These differential-equation-based analyses of global brain dynamics 
represent regional firing rates using a mean-field approximation46. Such models can be fitted 
to functional neuroimaging data by linearizing the initial stochastic nonlinear system of 
differential equations around a fixed point using the method of moments46 and using 
methods such as approximate Bayesian computation to fit parameters45. In the QC domain, 
quantum algorithms have been developed that have the potential to offer exponential 
speedups in the solving of linear differential equations48,49. Furthermore, models such as the 
QBM39 and QVAE40, as discussed in the previous subsection, may be naturally applied to 
model complex distributions such as those found in neurodynamics datasets.
Emani et al.
Page 10
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

General-purpose quantum solvers for nonlinear systems of differential equations have also 
been proposed50, although so far these seem unlikely to offer speedups over classical 
methods. Efficient general-purpose solvers would eliminate the need for linear 
approximations and allow more accurate fitting of neural dynamical models, particularly out 
of steady state (for example, transitions between resting-state and task-based fMRI). This 
application may help motivate finding fast quantum algorithms for nonlinear differential 
equations.
The computational challenge in human neuroscience is particularly acute in the case of 
‘deep’ behavioral phenotyping (for example, digital real-time measures), which can generate 
massive amounts of continuously measured dynamical behavioral variables with varied 
granularity. In this situation, there is clear potential for ‘very deep’ optimization and the 
opportunity for massive state-space exploration. Relevant use-case scenarios include in-the-
moment clinical decisions that may require rapid computation. This becomes challenging for 
longitudinal real-time digital phenotyping, which may require rapid and precise data 
reduction. For instance, rich individualized phenotypic characterization using high-
resolution video and audio datasets have yet to be leveraged since they are identifiable in 
raw form and present operational challenges to data reduction and protection of participant 
privacy.
Collectively, the complexity of human neurobehavioral data tests the boundaries of learning 
algorithms, which have to deal with the high dimensionality of data needed to robustly link 
nonlinear dynamics of brain states (for example, fMRI) and the influence of time-related 
variables relevant to behavioral mapping. Recent deep learning approaches using 
interpretable recurrent networks have provided a powerful means of learning such brain-
state/behavior associations de novo by jointly modeling fMRI and behavioral data51. 
Quantum analogs of neural network frameworks (such as QNNs52, QBMs39 and QVAEs40) 
have the potential to discover novel structure in these datasets. Models such as HQMMs 
provide alternative dynamical models with intrinsically quantum representations22, which 
have been shown to have comparable or possibly improved performance relative to classical 
methods on small-scale problems through classical simulations. Further, there is evidence 
that HQMMs allow complex dynamics to be modeled in a reduced state space21 compared to 
classical models. The application of such methods to behavioral data, though, is a long-term 
goal, since reliable qRAM appears necessary to handle large dataset sizes.
Integration across disciplines.
Stitching together insights across fields and levels of analyses to yield a complete picture of 
brain function is an ongoing challenge. Quantum machine learning may help elucidate the 
interdependencies between levels through its ability to learn and simulate nonlinear, 
potentially classically intractable models. One promising avenue involves mechanism-
agnostic machine learning methods like deep neural networks, where biological insights are 
gained by interpreting the model a posteriori. Such an interpretable framework would 
involve connections between modules such as gene regulatory networks, on the one hand, 
and structural or functional neuroimaging parameters (for example, cortical thickness, white 
matter integrity and dynamic functional connectivity) on the other. The exact nature of these 
Emani et al.
Page 11
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

connections could be altered in competing hypotheses. One could imagine a hierarchical 
network with molecular phenotypes at the base, emergent neuroimaging-based parameters at 
a higher layer, and behavioral phenotypes as prediction targets. An alternative framework 
would treat the molecular and neural-systems-level components as parallel factors in 
determining behavior, with the latter having been influenced at a developmental stage and 
not directly emerging from the molecular phenotypes per se but rather operating in 
dependent lockstep. Thus, different architectures of relationships between levels of analysis 
may be constructed. The National Institute of Mental Health in the United States has 
recently supported efforts at building such multiscale, convergent neuroscience approaches 
(https://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/pa-files/par-17-176.html). Such an analysis could be 
aided by QNNs52 and quantum variational classifiers53 designed for use on non-qRAM, 
gate-based quantum computers. Quantum variational classifiers are able to successfully 
classify states designed to be hard to simulate classically53. This hints at the greater 
generality of such circuits than their classical counterparts. Here the challenge lies in scaling 
up the available number of qubits.
Epilogue
While the field of QC is undergoing notable development and progress in both hardware and 
software, knowledge gaps and challenges remain. To surpass classical computers, quantum 
computer architectures will need to improve numbers of and connectivity between qubits, 
reduce error rates both for operations and storage, and expand algorithmic development into 
all areas where classical computing faces inherent bottlenecks. These challenges are all 
significant and are partially conflicting; indeed, the central experimental QC challenge is to 
create quantum systems that are both highly decoupled from unwanted environmental 
degrees of freedom yet subject to fast and precise control and measurement. While there has 
been steady experimental progress over the past two decades, it is not easy to predict the rate 
of future improvements in QC. A recent consensus study on the progress and prospects of 
QC from the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine estimates that to 
effectively break current internet security protocols (that is, find a private key in a 1,024-bit 
RSA encrypted message) using Shor’s algorithm requires building a quantum computer that 
is five orders of magnitude larger and has error rates that are two orders of magnitude lower 
than existing machines54. More than 100 academic and government laboratories around the 
world are working to address these challenges with a variety of hardware solutions54. These 
include ion-trap quantum computers with 20–100 qubits that are likely to become available 
by the early 2020s54. Leveraging the power of lithographic technology, superconducting 
quantum computers hold great promise, and 5-, 16- and 20-qubit machines are available to 
users via the web. Other promising approaches include developing quantum computers 
based on photonic, neutral-atom and semiconductor qubits54.
As mentioned above, many algorithmic quantum speedups depend on qRAM, but there is no 
practical implementation of this technology. In fact, this reliance on qRAM, in part, stems 
from attempts to arrive at algorithms that are essentially quantum versions of classical 
algorithms. An alternative approach is to design intrinsically quantum algorithms that take 
advantage of quantum features such as interference. We think that this alternative approach 
offers the added benefit that small-scale versions of problems are readily implementable on 
Emani et al.
Page 12
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

existing hardware. Indeed, recent advances in quantum machine learning algorithms exploit 
the exponentially large quantum state space to estimate kernel functions53,55, as well as the 
natural ability of quantum computers to execute kernel-based classification56,57. We believe 
that generalizations of these algorithms for genomics applications hold great promise and 
will allow assessment of the current capabilities of publicly available quantum computers29. 
Given the potential of quantum computers to efficiently explore a vast state space, we think 
that the natural applications to neuroscience problems are largely associated with 
optimization and machine learning, as detailed above. We feel that another potentially 
fruitful path is to identify computational problems that can be naturally cast into a quantum 
framework. For example, the minimum free energy among all possible protein folds is an 
important problem with an exponentially large search space and thus a compelling target. 
Another natural set of problems are those associated with quantum biology — the study of 
chemical processes including formation of excited electron states within molecules (for 
example, proteins) in living cells, along with their functional effects58. These processes are 
inherently quantum mechanical and may involve an exponentially vast set of excitation 
states, which can only be efficiently modeled by applying transformations to an 
exponentially large state space afforded by a quantum computer. However, we are not sure 
whether such processes can be relevant to higher-levels of brain function (and 
consciousness59); the algorithms used by the brain at David Marr’s algorithmic or 
representational level may ultimately be classical60, although the advent of quantum 
machine learning means that increasingly this need not be the case for artificial agents. 
While a cautious albeit optimistic estimation associated with steady progress of quantum 
hardware development (for example, applying Moore’s law) puts the availability of 
sufficiently powerful, universal quantum computers years in the future, sudden, orders-of-
magnitude breakthroughs in resolution, noise reduction and so forth are not unprecedented 
in experimental physics. We strongly believe that such unforeseen breakthroughs would 
unleash the power of quantum computing to address pressing computational challenges in 
biology.
Acknowledgements
This work is a product of discussions initiated during a NIMH-convened virtual workshop, addressing 
computational challenges in genomics and neuroscience via massively parallel computing and QC (https://
www.nimh.nih.gov/news/events/2018/virtual-workshop-solving-computational-challenges-in-genomics-and-
neuroscience-via-parallel-and-quantum-computing.shtml). We would also like to acknowledge the help and support 
of Lora Bingaman of the NIMH in overseeing the administration of this collaboration. M.B.G. acknowledges the 
support of NIH grant MH116492–03S1.
References
1. Mohseni M et al. Nature 543, 171–174 (2017). [PubMed: 28277529] 
2. Arute F et al. Nature 574, 505–510 (2019). [PubMed: 31645734] 
3. U.S. House of Representatives. 115th Congress H.R. 6227, U.S. National Quantum Initiative Act 
(Government Printing Office, 2018).
4. Monroe C, Raymer MG & Taylor J Science 364, 440–442 (2019). [PubMed: 31048480] 
5. Thew R, Jennewein T & Sasaki M Quantum Sci. Technol 5, 010201 (2019).
6. Nielsen MA & Chuang IL Quantum Computation and Quantum Information (Cambridge Univ. 
Press, 2010).
Emani et al.
Page 13
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

7. Alexeev Y et al. Quantum computer systems for scientific discovery. Preprint at https://
arxiv.org/abs/1912.07577 (2019).
8. Durr C & Hoyer P A quantum algorithm for finding the minimum Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/
quant-ph/9607014 (1996).
9. Brassard G, Høyer P, Mosca M & Tapp A in Contemporary Mathematics: Quantum Computation 
and Information (eds. Lomonaco SJ & Brandt HE) 53–74 (American Mathematical Society, 2002).
10. Farhi E, Goldstone J, Gutmann S & Sipser M Phys. Rev. Lett 81, 5442–5444 (1998).
11. Li Z, Li J, Dattani NS, Umrigar CJ & Chan GKLJ Chem. Phys 150, 024302 (2019).
12. Grover LK in Proc. Twenty-Eighth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing 212–219 
(Association for Computing Machinery, 1996).
13. Ambainis A & Kokainis M in Proc. 49th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of 
Computing – STOC 2017 989–1002 (2017).
14. Farhi E, Goldstone J, Gutmann S & Sipser M Quantum computation by adiabatic evolution 
Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0001106 (2000).
15. Kadowaki T & Nishimori H Phys. Rev. E Stat. Phys. Plasmas Fluids Relat. Interdiscip. Topics 58, 
5355–5363 (1998).
16. Farhi E, Goldstone J & Gutmann S A quantum approximate optimization algorithm Preprint at 
https://arxiv.org/abs/1411.4028 (2014).
17. Harrow AW Small quantum computers and large classical data sets Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/
2004.00026 (2020).
18. Giovannetti V, Lloyd S & Maccone L Phys. Rev. Lett 100, 160501 (2008). [PubMed: 18518173] 
19. Arunachalam S & de Wolf R ACM SIGACT News 48, 41–67 (2017).
20. Li H & Homer N Brief. Bioinform 11, 473–483 (2010). [PubMed: 20460430] 
21. Monras A, Beige A & Wiesner K Hidden quantum Markov models and non-adaptive read-out of 
many-body states Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/1002.2337 (2010).
22. Srinivasan S, Downey C & Boots B in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 31 
(eds. Bengio S et al.) 10338–10347 (Curran Associates, 2018).
23. Li H & Durbin R Bioinformatics 26, 589–595 (2010). [PubMed: 20080505] 
24. Dobin A et al. Bioinformatics 29, 15–21 (2013). [PubMed: 23104886] 
25. Ramesh H & Vinay VJ Discrete Algorithms 1, 103–110 (2003).
26. Montanaro A Algorithmica 77, 16–39 (2017).
27. Howie BN, Donnelly P & Marchini J PLoS Genet 5, e1000529 (2009). [PubMed: 19543373] 
28. McConnell MJ et al. Science 356, eaal1641 (2017). [PubMed: 28450582] 
29. Kathuria K, Ratan A, McConnell M & Bekiranov S Quantum Mach. Intell 2, 7 (2020).
30. Griffiths RC & Marjoram P in Progress in Population Genetics and Human Evolution 257–270 
(Springer, 1997).
31. Li H & Durbin R Nature 475, 493–496 (2011). [PubMed: 21753753] 
32. Yang J, Lee SH, Goddard ME & Visscher PM Am. J. Hum. Genet 88, 76–82 (2011). [PubMed: 
21167468] 
33. Harrow AW, Hassidim A & Lloyd S Phys. Rev. Lett 103, 150502 (2009). [PubMed: 19905613] 
34. Wiebe N, Braun D & Lloyd S Phys. Rev. Lett 109, 050505 (2012). [PubMed: 23006156] 
35. Li RY, Di Felice R, Rohs R & Lidar DA NPJ Quantum Inf 4, 14 (2018). [PubMed: 29652405] 
36. Gamazon ER et al. Nat. Genet 47, 1091–1098 (2015). [PubMed: 26258848] 
37. Wang D et al. Science 362, eaat8464 (2018). [PubMed: 30545857] 
38. Robinson RW in Combinatorial Mathematics V. Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 622 (ed. Little 
CHC) 28–43 (Springer, 1977).
39. Amin MH, Andriyash E, Rolfe J, Kulchytskyy B & Melko R Phys. Rev. X 8, 021050 (2018).
40. Khoshaman A, Vinci W, Denis B, Andriyash E & Amin MH Quantum Sci. Technol 4, 014001 
(2019).
41. Zhang B & Horvath S Stat. Appl. Genet. Mol. Biol 4, 17 (2005).
Emani et al.
Page 14
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

42. O’Malley D, Vesselinov VV, Alexandrov BS & Alexandrov LB PLoS One 13, e0206653 (2018). 
[PubMed: 30532243] 
43. Fischl B Neuroimage 62, 774–781 (2012). [PubMed: 22248573] 
44. Reinen JM et al. Nat. Commun 9, 1157 (2018). [PubMed: 29559638] 
45. Demirtaş M et al. Neuron 101, 1181–1194.e13 (2019). [PubMed: 30744986] 
46. Deco G et al. J. Neurosci 34, 7886–7898 (2014). [PubMed: 24899711] 
47. Deco G, Senden M & Jirsa V Front. Comput. Neurosci 10.3389/fncom.2012.00068 (2012).
48. Childs AM & Liu J-P Commun. Math. Phys 375, 1427–1457 (2020).
49. Berry DW, Childs AM, Ostrander A & Wang G Commun. Math. Phys 356, 1057–1081 (2017).
50. Leyton SK & Osborne TJ A quantum algorithm to solve nonlinear differential equations Preprint at 
https://arxiv.org/abs/0812.4423v1 (2008).
51. Dezfouli A, Morris R, Ramos F, Dayan P & Balleine BW in Adv. Neural Information Processing 
Systems 31 (eds. Bengio S et al.) 4228–4237 (Curran Associates, 2018).
52. Farhi E & Neven H Classification with quantum neural networks on near term processors Preprint 
at https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.06002 (2018).
53. Havlíček V et al. Nature 567, 209–212 (2019). [PubMed: 30867609] 
54. National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine. Quantum Computing: Progress and 
Prospects 10.17226/25196 (2019).
55. Schuld M & Killoran N Phys. Rev. Lett 122, 040504 (2019). [PubMed: 30768345] 
56. Schuld M, Fingerhuth M & Petruccione F Europhys. Lett 119, 60002 (2017).
57. Schuld M, Bocharov A, Svore KM & Wiebe N Phys. Rev. A (Coll. Park) 101, 032308 (2020).
58. Lambert N et al. Nat. Phys 9, 10–18 (2013).
59. Tegmark M Phys. Rev. E Stat. Phys. Plasmas Fluids Relat. Interdiscip. Topics 61, 4194–4206 
(2000). [PubMed: 11088215] 
60. Marr DC & Poggio T Neurosci. Res. Program Bull 15, 470–488 (1977).
61. Van Meter R, Itoh KM & Ladd TD in MS+S 2006 – Controllable Quantum States: Mesoscopic 
Superconductivity and Spintronics, Proceedings of the International Symposium 183–188 (World 
Scientific Publishing, 2008).
62. Foss-Feig JH et al. Biol. Psychiatry 81, 848–861 (2017). [PubMed: 28434615] 
63. Outeiral C et al. WIREs Comput. Mol. Sci e1481 (2020).
64. Perdomo-Ortiz A, Dickson N, Drew-Brook M, Rose G & Aspuru-Guzik A Sci. Rep 2, 571 (2012). 
[PubMed: 22891157] 
65. Kandala A et al. Nature 549, 242–246 (2017). [PubMed: 28905916] 
66. Dorner R, Goold J & Vedral V Interface Focus 2, 522–528 (2012). [PubMed: 23919131] 
Emani et al.
Page 15
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Box 1 |
Glossary
Biological
•
Single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP). Germline (inherited) variant in a 
genome where the identity of a single nucleotide is changed relative to a 
reference genome; the prevalence of a SNP in a population is dependent on 
the pattern of its inheritance.
•
Genetic recombination. Exchange of segments between separate genomes or 
chromosomes, or different regions of the same chromosome, by the creation 
of single-stranded (in, for example, viruses) or double-stranded (in, for 
example, humans) breaks and subsequent ligation of the crossed segments.
•
Genome-wide association study (GWAS). Identification of variants in a 
population with statistically significant associations to the occurrence of a 
studied phenotype.
•
Quantitative trait locus (QTL). Variant in a genome or population with 
statistically significant association to the occurrence of a studied phenotype, 
including but not limited to endophenotypes (that is, phenotypes at the 
suborganismal level; for example, cell- or tissue-level gene expression).
Machine learning
•
Hidden Markov model (HMM). Stochastic latent-state method to model a 
linear sequence of observations as a probabilistic sequence of underlying state 
transitions and state-to-observation emissions.
•
Boltzmann machine. Generative classical neural network model, based on an 
energy function containing local (unary) and pairwise terms over an 
underlying undirected graph. Recently, the model has been extended to 
replace the classical energy with a quantum Hamiltonian to form a quantum 
Boltzmann machine (QBM)39.
•
Variational autoencoder (VAE). Generative neural network model, 
incorporating a latent space that is mapped to observed variables by a learned 
feedforward classical neural network. Latent space can be a classical 
(Gaussian) or quantum (QBM)40 distribution.
Quantum computing
•
Quantum superposition. A fundamental principle of quantum mechanics 
whereby the overall state of a system (for example, an electron in an atom or 
qubit) is in a linear combination of orthogonal basis states (for example, the 
lowest energy state, next excited state and so forth). For example, if |0〉 
denotes the lowest energy state of a qubit and |1〉 an excited state of a qubit, 
the state of the qubit, |ψ〉, can be a superposition of basis states: |ψ〉 = α0|0〉 + 
α1|1〉.
Emani et al.
Page 16
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

•
Quantum random-access memory I (qRAM). In analogy with random 
access memory (RAM), which uses n bits to address 2n distinct memory cells, 
qRAM would use n qubits to address any quantum superposition of 2n 
memory cells18.
•
Quantum annealing (QA). A technique for minimizing a function f using a 
low-temperature quantum system whose energy corresponds to f, along with 
an auxiliary field that is slowly turned off. The auxiliary field attempts to 
create superpositions between nearby qubit strings, similarly to equally 
weighting possible solutions, and facilitates quantum tunneling (that is, 
transition of a quantum state between nearby low-energy strings even through 
regions of higher energy) to arrive at a minimum of f relatively efficiently 
once turned off.
•
Hidden quantum Markov model (HQMM). The quantum analog of 
HMMs, where the sequence of quantum operations is such that information of 
the state transition and emission probabilities of the qubits can be retained 
even after partial measurement of the system (that is, measurements do not 
collapse the entire system)21.
Emani et al.
Page 17
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Box 2 |
Computational opportunities for the future
Existing quantum algorithms — for example, function minimization — are often written 
in terms of abstract and highly general functions. If biological applications can help 
motivate specific, mathematically well-posed tasks, then it may be the case that targeted 
quantum algorithm development can lead to improvement. While this promise is 
discussed at length in the main text in the context of the study of the human brain, here 
we briefly introduce some of the key areas of ongoing research in quantum computing, 
related to and providing the context for applications in biology.
Optimization in biomolecular problems
There has been considerable interest in extending QC to biomolecular and biological 
problems63. In several cases, small examples of biological problems have been mapped to 
combinatorial optimization problems. A QA approach was employed in the exploration 
of the coarse-grained folding landscape of a six-amino-acid peptide, within a 2D lattice 
framework64. QA was also evaluated against a set of classical methods on an 
optimization problem involving the search for the consensus DNA sequence motif of 
transcription factor binding35. In this instance, Li et al. trained a classifier (sequence 
binds or does not bind) and a ranking algorithm (ranking sequences by binding affinity), 
finding a slight improvement of QA over classical approaches in the classification 
problem and similar performance for the ranking task.
Simulation of classical and quantum systems
There have been successful demonstrations of the application of quantum computation to 
problems in chemistry. A variational quantum eigensolver (VQE) approach was used65 to 
estimate the ground state energies of small molecules as a function of their component 
atomic separations. Briefly, short quantum circuits define a variational ansatz of trial 
solutions for the ground state, and the circuit parameters are varied to minimize the 
energy using algorithms such as gradient descent. While the complexity of simulating 
quantum dynamics on quantum computers is well understood and is usually tractable, the 
success of VQE will depend on the quality of the ansatz and is an active area of ongoing 
research.
Quantum simulation of chemical reactions is known in principle to be possible on a 
quantum computer, and, as the practical details are fleshed out, this is expected to be an 
important application of quantum computers for applications both inside and outside of 
biology. One particular strength is in modeling dynamics, and there is evidence that 
energy transport and electron transport in biological molecules involves quantum effects 
that could potentially be more accurately modeled by a quantum simulation66.
Emani et al.
Page 18
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Fig. 1 |. Concepts in quantum computing.
a, Conceptual illustration of bit versus qubit. The state of a qubit can be represented by a 
point on the unit sphere with the north and south poles corresponding to the states 0 and 1 of 
a classical bit. b, The state space of 3 qubits is a 23-dimensional complex vector. c, Classical 
(number field sieve (NFS) algorithm) and quantum (Beckman–Chari–Devabhaktuni–Preskill 
(BCDP) implementation of Shor’s algorithm) run times for factoring integers. Shor’s 
algorithm for quantum computers yields an exponential speedup over the best known 
classical algorithm (panel c adapted with permission from ref. 61, R. Van Meter et al.).
Emani et al.
Page 19
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Fig. 2 |. Complexity of linking levels of analyses from genetics to human behavior.
The challenge consists, in part, of the need to interrogate the enormous search space for 
determining the mapping across levels, which constitutes a many-to-many probabilistic 
problem. Computational innovation will be a key effort to help close these gaps. Portion of 
figure adapted with permission from ref. 62, Elsevier. Also shown are some of the ways in 
which QC can aid in the interrogation of these levels.
Emani et al.
Page 20
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 July 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
