Source-PDF: D:\Review\Paper\Clinical prediction bridge (your current query, improved)\highest priority clinical bridge directly about disease predictiondiagnosis\Quantum-Inspired Heuristic Algorithm for Secure Healthcare Prediction Using Blockchain Technology.pdf
Relative-Path: Paper\Clinical prediction bridge (your current query, improved)\highest priority clinical bridge directly about disease predictiondiagnosis\Quantum-Inspired Heuristic Algorithm for Secure Healthcare Prediction Using Blockchain Technology.pdf
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 28, NO. 6, JUNE 2024
3371
Quantum-Inspired Heuristic Algorithm for
Secure Healthcare Prediction Using
Blockchain Technology
Hirak Mazumdar
, Member, IEEE, Chinmay Chakraborty
, Senior Member, IEEE,
Satheesh Bojja Venkatakrishnan
, Senior Member, IEEE, Ajeet Kaushik
, and Hardik A. Gohel
Abstract—People’s health is adversely affected by en-
vironmental changes and poor nutritional habits, empha-
sizing the importance of health awareness. The health-
care system encounters signiﬁcant challenges, including
data insufﬁciency, threats, errors, and delays. To address
these issues and advance medical care, we propose a
secure healthcare prediction method, prioritizing patient
privacy and data transmission efﬁciency. The Quantum-
inspired heuristic algorithm combined with Kril Herd Op-
timization (QKHO) is introduced for healthcare prediction,
along with a comparison to the Deep Forward Neural Net-
work (DFNN) optimized using Krill Herd Optimization (KHO)
and Quantum-inspired heuristic algorithm combined with
Kril Herd Optimization. The proposed QKHO model outper-
forms conventional models and exhibits higher accuracy,
precision, recall, and F1-score. Blockchain technology en-
sures secure data transmission to the server, surpassing
the security level of existing RSA and Difﬁe-Hellman algo-
rithms.
Index
Terms—Healthcare
prediction,
biomedical,
machine learning, quantum krill herd optimization (QKHO),
deep forward neural network (DFNN) and blockchain.
Manuscript received 14 May 2023; revised 22 June 2023 and 25
July 2023; accepted 8 August 2023. Date of publication 11 August
2023; date of current version 6 June 2024. This work was supported
by the Applied Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAI) laboratory at the University of
Houston Victoria (UHV), through the Generous Summer and Internal
Research Grants by the UHV’s Ofﬁce of Research and Sponsored
Program(ORSP). (Corresponding author: Chinmay Chakraborty.)
Hirak Mazumdar is with the School of Technology, Woxsen University,
Hyderabad 502345, India (e-mail: hirak.mazumdar@woxsen.edu.in).
Chinmay Chakraborty is with the Electronics and Communication
Engineering, BIT Mesra, Mesra, Jharkhand 814142, India (e-mail: ccha-
krabarty@bitmesra.ac.in).
Satheesh Bojja Venkatakrishnan is with the Florida International Uni-
versity, Miami, FL 33199 USA (e-mail: sbojjave@ﬁu.edu).
Ajeet Kaushik is with the NanoBioTech Laboratory, Department of
Environmental Engineering, Florida Polytechnic University, Lakeland,
FL 33805 USA, and also with the School of Engineering, University
of Petroleum and Energy Studies, Dehradun 248007, India (e-mail:
akaushik@ﬂoridapoly.edu).
Hardik A. Gohel is with the Applied AI Research Laboratory, De-
partment of Computer Information Sciences, University of Houston at
Victoria, Victoria, TX 77901 USA (e-mail: gohelh@uhv.edu).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/JBHI.2023.3304326
I. INTRODUCTION
A
RTIFICIAL Intelligence (AI) has gained considerable mo-
mentum in driving human intelligence processes, particu-
larly in healthcare and the Internet of Things (IoT) domains [1],
[2]. IoT is often integrated with AI-driven systems to monitor
health statuses based on sensor output. Machine learning and
deep learning algorithms help analyze images to detect diseases
and maintain healthier environments. Centralized data used in
these algorithms can create problems such as security issues,
single points of failure, and increased latency. IoT is a critical
technology connecting the physical and digital worlds [3], [4],
[5].
IoT technology enables machine-to-machine communication,
allowing for data sharing without human intervention. Smart
healthcare systems utilizing IoT can monitor patient progress
and movement, including during clinical trials [6]. Blockchain
technology has the potential to enhance healthcare domains
through decentralization, heightened data protection and conﬁ-
dentiality, patient control over health information, increased ac-
cessibilityandresilience,transparency,trustworthiness,anddata
validation. It has been particularly beneﬁcial in safely sharing
COVID-19 data between clinical laboratories and hospitals [7],
[8].
Quantum computing enhances secure data processing in
smart healthcare systems, while blockchain technology creates
a shared archive of health information, improving safety and
privacy. Quantum computing revolutionizes healthcare by an-
alyzing Big Data and improving patient care, while securing
blockchain systems for sensitive data storage. Integration of
quantum computing in healthcare enables patient-centric ser-
vices through the cloud [9].
This study focuses on quantum models using quantum heuris-
tic algorithms in healthcare applications. It presents a Deep
Feedforward Neural Network (DFNN) optimized by Krill Herd
Optimization (KHO) algorithm and Quantum Krill Herd Opti-
mization for healthcare prediction. This system predicts normal
or abnormal human conditions, securely transmitting abnormal
data to servers using blockchain technology, ensuring hetero-
geneity, incompleteness, timeliness,
longevity, privacy, and
ownership.
The primary contributions of this study encompass the fol-
lowing aspects:
2168-2194 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Rajshahi University Of Engineering and Technology. Downloaded on April 13,2026 at 18:13:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

3372
IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 28, NO. 6, JUNE 2024
Fig. 1.
Schematic diagram for proposed healthcare prediction using blockchain technologies.
1) The article presents a healthcare prediction method to
improve medical care by tackling health-support system
challenges.
2) The article proposes a healthcare prediction method using
a Quantum-inspired heuristic algorithm with Kril Herd
Optimization(QKHO)andadeepforwardneuralnetwork
(DFNN) enhanced by a Kril Herd Optimization (KHO)
algorithm.
II. RELATED WORKS
In this section, the literature on healthcare prediction and
secure data transmission in the medical ﬁeld is discussed.
Muthu et al. explored the use of IoT-based wearable sensors
for healthcare forecasting and symptom analysis [10], aiming
to address issues such as delayed transmission, data threats,
and misdiagnosis. They proposed a generalized solution called
GARIC, which uses regression rules to collect patient data
from IoT. Chung and Jung developed a dynamic cluster model
using a convolutional neural network for healthcare predic-
tions [11], resulting in a signiﬁcant amount of high-quality
data and improving the predictive model’s performance by
13%.
Big data analysis offers signiﬁcant opportunities for health
predictions. Venkatesh et al. used the Big Data Predictive Ana-
lytics Model with Naive Bayes (BPA-NB) [12] for large datasets,
training on heart disease data and achieving 97.12% accuracy.
However, cloud-hosted health management systems still face
challenges handling extensive health data volumes for testing
and organization.
Kumar, Vimala, and Brito proposed cognitive technology
for effective management and distribution of medical data in
healthcare [13]. The Cognitive Data Transfer System (CDTM)
signiﬁcantly improved data transmission for patients with poor
health, enhancing accuracy, bandwidth, and CPU usage. Quan-
tum technologies offer advancements in computing, addressing
challengesinprocessingandanalyzingmedicalBigDatabeyond
classical machine limits. Quantum computers utilize qubits,
which allow faster solving of complex problems compared to
classicalcomputersthatusebinarybits.Quantummachinelearn-
ing (QML) combines quantum systems and machine learning
techniques, providing speedups in various clinical analyses, bi-
ological parameters, and imaging modalities, beneﬁting medical
professionals [14].
Guang et al. proposed an architecture for HER where an
authentication method was provided but according to their per-
formance it shows very poor in nature [15].
The existing blockchain and traditional cryptographic meth-
ods face vulnerabilities with the emergence of quantum comput-
ers, which raises concerns about their ability to ensure sufﬁcient
security. Consequently, the advancement of quantum blockchain
machine learning techniques can bolster the algorithm’s security
measures.
III. BLOCKCHAIN-BASED SECURE HEALTHCARE PREDICTION
MODEL USING DFNN
A. Overview
The proposed model utilizes IoT data and an enhanced deep
feed-forward neural network (DFNN) for normal and abnormal
data prediction. Krill herd optimization optimizes DFNN weight
and bias, while DFNN and QKH algorithm ensure high accu-
racy. Secure, quantum-level data transmission is achieved with
blockchain technology.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Rajshahi University Of Engineering and Technology. Downloaded on April 13,2026 at 18:13:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

MAZUMDAR et al.: QUANTUM-INSPIRED HEURISTIC ALGORITHM FOR SECURE HEALTHCARE PREDICTION
3373
B. Healthcare Prediction Using DFNN
The DFNN is a deep learning model that learns hierarchical
data representations without using data transformation layers.
It consists of input, hidden, and output layers, each with sev-
eral interconnected processing units. The model is applied to
two well-known datasets, including heart disease and thyroid
datasets.
The DFNN can be represented mathematically with input
features [fm] and ‘O’. ‘OH’ indicates the output time for the
hidden layer. As DFNN has multiple hidden layers, the main
hidden layer’s load increases. Each ﬁrst hidden element output
is multiplied by weights in the second hidden layer [16].
The computation of the weighted values for the data within
the initial hidden layer is carried out by employing (1):
OH1(x = 1, 2, . . . , K) =
 M

m=1
axmfm

+ Cx
(1)
Here, Cx is the bias, axm is the weight between the input feature
and the ﬁrst hidden layer is represented, while M and K denote
the quantity of hidden and input nodes within the primary hidden
layer, respectively.
Equation (2) provides the expression for the activation func-
tion pertaining to the output of the initial hidden layer:
G(OH1(x)) =
1
(1 + e−OH1(x))
(2)
Equation (3) outlines the functionality of the hidden layer at the
nth position:
OHn(q) =
 K

z=1
aqzG(OHn−1(z))

+ Cq
(3)
Cq represents the bias for the hidden node at the qth position,
while aqz signiﬁes the weight connecting the nth and (n −1)th
hidden layers, both containing K hidden nodes.
The activation function in (4) characterizes the output gener-
ated by the nth hidden layer:
G(OHn(q)) =
1
(1 + e−OHn(q))
(4)
In the output layer, the nth hidden layer’s output is multiplied
by the interconnecting weights and combined with the bias Cp,
as illustrated by (5):
O(p) = G
 K

q=1
apqG(OHn(q)) + Cp

(5)
In this case, apq denotes the weight connecting the nth hidden
layer and the output layer, speciﬁcally between the pth and qth
nodes.
For the enhancement of the DFNN, it is essential to mini-
mize the discrepancy between the model output and the desired
output. The error measurement is determined by utilizing (6):
Error = 1
M
M

m=1
(A(Om) −T(OT ))2
(6)
A(Om) represents the desired output, while T(OT ) signiﬁes the
actual output. To diminish the error, the weight values need to
undergo iterative adjustments.
C. Fine-Tuning Phase
The DFNN’s weight parameters are altered using the krill
herd optimization (KHO) algorithm, inspired by Antarctic krill
swarming behavior. Krill growth focuses on increasing density,
ﬁnding food, and seeking high-food areas. A guiding target
directs krill towards optimal conﬁgurations, resulting in low ob-
jective function values near high density and nutrient separation.
Hunting affects the swarm by decreasing density and separating
krill from food sources.
Initialization: During this phase, the solutions or krill are
initialized. In the context of this work, the weight parameters of
the DFNN need to be optimized. Thus, these weight parameters
or solutions are initialized as follows [16]:
Set = k1, k2, k3, . . . , kN
(7)
Here, kN denotes the Nth solution or krill, which can be deﬁned
as:
kN = vab, vbc, vcdN
(8)
In the equation, vab is the input-ﬁrst hidden layer weight, vbc is
the weight between adjacent hidden layers, and vcd is the weight
between the nth output and hidden layers with unique nodes c
and d.
Fitness calculation: Once the solutions are initialized, the
ﬁtness function is estimated to evaluate each solution. In this
work, the ﬁtness function is deﬁned as follows [17]:
FN = min(Error)
(9)
Using this ﬁtness function, each solution is evaluated, and the
solution with the minimum ﬁtness is selected as the optimal
solution.
Update the solution: The KH algorithm’s immediate state
involves the separation and mass of krill, with the highest
thickness indicating each person’s ﬁtness nutrition center. Three
inﬂuential factors for individual krill include movement induced
by other krill, foraging activity, and random diffusion.
Movement prompted by other krill individuals: Krill individu-
als aim for higher density while inﬂuenced by others’ movement.
This motion, (Ωp), is assessed by three effects: local, target, and
repulsive. For krill individual t:
Y new
t
= δtY max
t
+ uxY old
t
(10)
δt =
nt

j=1
(Fita −Fitb)
(Fita −Fitb) ×
(wa −wb)
(|wa −wb| + rand(0, 1))

+ 2

rand(0, 1) +
iter
itermax

wbest
a Fitbest
a
(11)
Y max
t
: max induced motion, ux: inertia weight ([0,1]), Y old
t
:
previous induced motion.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Rajshahi University Of Engineering and Technology. Downloaded on April 13,2026 at 18:13:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

3374
IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 28, NO. 6, JUNE 2024
Fig. 2.
Comparison of classiﬁcation performance for heart disease datasets. (a) Comparison of standard metrices, such as precision, accuracy,
recall, and F1-score. (b) The ROC-AUC curves. (c) Representation of the learning trajectory in terms of test accuracy and loss (Top four learning
approaches with 500 epochs). (d) Depiction of the learning trajectory for test loss and accuracy, comparing the presence or absence of a quantum
layer over 500 epochs. (e) The Confusion matrix for different learning approaches.
Sensing distance (Esense):
Esense =
1
5NTotal
NTotal

l=1
|wa −wl|
(12)
Krill with distance less than Esense are neighbors.
Calculate foraging activity: Foraging velocity depends on
current and previous food location data for the ath krill personal:
Y new
Fa
= 0.02 ×

2 ×

1 −
iter
itermax

× wa ×
 l = 1ntwa/Fitl
 k = 1nt1/Fitb

Authorized licensed use limited to: Rajshahi University Of Engineering and Technology. Downloaded on April 13,2026 at 18:13:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

MAZUMDAR et al.: QUANTUM-INSPIRED HEURISTIC ALGORITHM FOR SECURE HEALTHCARE PREDICTION
3375
Fig. 3.
Comparison of classiﬁcation performance for Thyroid disease datasets. (a) Comparison of standard metrices, such as precision, accuracy,
recall, and F1-score. (b) The ROC-AUC curves. (c) Representation of the learning trajectory in terms of test accuracy and loss (Top four learning
approaches with 500 epochs) (d) Depiction of the learning trajectory for test loss and accuracy, comparing the presence or absence of a quantum
layer over 500 epochs. (e) The Confusion matrix for different learning approaches.
+ Fitabest × Sbest
a
	
+ wxf × Y Fa
old
(13)
wxf: inertia weight of foraging motion.
Calculate random diffusion: To increase population diversity,
random dispersal is considered:
Y new
Da = α × Y max
D
(14)
α: random directional vector in [−1, 1].
Position update: The pth krill’s updated position can be ex-
pressed as:
wnew’
a
=wnew
a
+

Y new
a
+Y new
Fa +Y new
Da

×Pconstant
nd

j=1
(Xj −Yj)
(15)
The qth component of the pth krill is:
wa,j =

wl,j
if rand ≤C
ua,j
if rand < C
(16)
C denotes Crossover probability rate: 0.2Fitbest
a .
Authorized licensed use limited to: Rajshahi University Of Engineering and Technology. Downloaded on April 13,2026 at 18:13:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

3376
IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 28, NO. 6, JUNE 2024
Algorithm 1: Quantum Krill Herd Algorithm [23].
1:
Input: h, ωn, ωf, Dmax, Vf, tmax, N max, J;
2:
Output: u;
3:
t = 1; δ ∈[0, 1];
4:
Evaluate individuals;
5:
Rank individuals; u′ as current best; Forj = 1 to h
6:
Calculate N new
j
, F new
j
, Dj;
7:
Update krill position;
8:
Quantum mutation if ΔJ ≥0;
9:
Update u, mutate inferior krill;
10:
t ←t + 1;
11:
Repeat if t ≤tmax, return u otherwise;
Mutation operation: Mutation process is modeled by:
wa,j = wbest,j + β(wm,j −wn,j)
(17)
wmod
a,j =

wnew
a,j
if rand ≤MR
wa,j
if rand > MR
(18)
Termination criteria: The algorithm halts after reaching the max
iterations, selecting the solution with the highest ﬁtness value
as the best weight parameters. Upon achieving the best exercise
using the KHO algorithm, this solution is applied to the DFNN,
forming the KHO-based weight improvement process.
IV. QUANTUM-INSPIRED MACHINE LEARNING AND KRILL
HERD ALGORITHM
Machine learning technologies analyze large datasets using
various techniques, with quantum machine learning (QML) fo-
cusing on enhancing performance via quantum computers [18].
Quantum computing addresses classical ML limitations, though
noise may cause discrepancies [19]. Quantum neural networks
(QNN) involve qubits or quantum kernels for dimensionality
reduction [20].
QMLcombinesMachineLearning,QuantumComputing,and
Quantum Information for complex optimization problems [21].
Nature-inspired algorithms like PSO, ACO, GA, and the krill
herd (KH) method are used for tasks traditional methods can’t
solve, including Quantum computation (QC)-based methods
like QPSO [22].
V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
A. Performance Metrics
Precision, accuracy, recall, and F1-score are used to evaluate
the QKHO-based DFNN prediction model. TP, FP, TN, and FN
determine these metrics [24].
B. Healthcare Prediction Using Heart and Liver Datasets
The effectiveness of various machine learning and deep learn-
ing approaches in predicting healthcare outcomes was assessed
using comprehensive datasets. Experiments were conducted
on Google Collaboratory with TensorFlow 2.5.0 and Python
3.10. Disease datasets were split into 70% for training and
TABLE I
ANALYSIS OF HEART DISEASE DATASET FOR DIFFERENT APPROACHES
30% for testing. The quantum convolution layer was optimized
using the Adam algorithm with a 0.0001 learning rate. UCI
machine learning repository datasets were utilized, well-suited
forreal-timehealthcareapplications.Quantummachinelearning
experiments will evaluate the proposed algorithm’s real-time
performance [25].
1) Healthcare Prediction Using Heart Disease Dataset:
A) Dataset description: This particular dataset consists of
76 features; however, all available studies reveal that only a
subset of 14 is utilized. Thus far, machine learning researchers
have solely employed the Cleveland database. The “target”
variable signiﬁes the occurrence of heart disease in an individ-
ual, depicted as an integer varying from 0 (no presence) to 4
(critical condition). With regard to the experiments involving
the Cleveland database, the primary goal was to distinguish
between the presence of heart disease (values 1, 2, 3, or 4) and
its nonexistence (value 0).
B) Performance analysis: Table I presents a thorough analy-
sis of heart disease datasets using different prediction models:
DFNN-QKHO, DFNN-KHO, DFNN, ANN, SVM, and KNN.
These models are evaluated based on precision, recall, F1-score,
and accuracy, utilizing input attributes like age, sex, and chest
pain type from the heart disease dataset for both training and
testing. Among the models, DFNN-QKHO stands out, achieving
an impressive precision of 99.23% and an accuracy of 99.2%.
By incorporating the quantum convolution layer (QKHO) to
enhance the performance of DFNN, the proposed model sur-
passes all conventional prediction models, making it a promising
candidate for heart disease prediction.
The F1-scores for each approach are provided in the ta-
ble, with DFNN-QKHO obtaining the highest value of 0.99,
followed closely by DFNN-KHO (0.98), DFNN (0.96), ANN
(0.95), KNN (0.95), and SVM (0.92). Additionally, the recall
of DFNN-QKHO signiﬁcantly improves compared to other
traditional prediction models discussed in the research. These
ﬁndings demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed DFNN-
QKHO model in accurately identifying positive cases while
maintaining high precision.
To further illustrate the comparison and performance of the
models, several ﬁgures are presented. Fig. 2(a) showcases a
visual comparison of commonly used metrics, while Fig. 2(b)
displays the ROC-AUC curve, where DFNN-QKHO achieves
an exceptional score of 0.99, indicating excellent predictive
power. In Fig. 2(c) and (d), the learning trajectories for test
accuracy and loss are compared between different algorithms
and the presence or absence of the quantum convolution layer,
respectively. Finally, Fig. 2(e) presents the Confusion Matrix
generated from test data, highlighting the superior performance
Authorized licensed use limited to: Rajshahi University Of Engineering and Technology. Downloaded on April 13,2026 at 18:13:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

MAZUMDAR et al.: QUANTUM-INSPIRED HEURISTIC ALGORITHM FOR SECURE HEALTHCARE PREDICTION
3377
Fig. 4.
Futuristic application of secured healthcare technology.
Fig. 5.
Security level vs data size.
TABLE II
ANALYSIS OF THYROID DISEASE DATASET FOR DIFFERENT APPROACHES
of DFNN-QKHO over DFNN-KHO and traditional algorithms.
This model exhibits enhanced accuracy by misclassifying only
a minimal number of cases, making it a promising advancement
in heart disease prediction.
2) Healthcare Prediction Using Thyroid Disease Dataset:
A) Dataset description: The Thyroid Disease Dataset includes
2800 training instances and 972 test instances. From this dataset,
29 or so attributes are utilized. These attributes are represented
as either Boolean or continuously valued.
B) Performance analysis: Table II presents a performance
analysis and comparison of predictive models applied to the
Thyroid disease dataset. The models considered include DFNN-
QKHO, DFNN-KHO, DFNN, ANN, SVM, and KNN, assessed
based on precision, recall, F1-score, and accuracy. Input at-
tributes from the Thyroid disease dataset were used for training
and evaluation. The ﬁndings show that the DFNN-QKHO model
achieved a precision of 100% and an accuracy of 99.9%. It
outperformed other models in terms of F1-score and recall,
scoring 0.99 and 99.56% respectively. The ROC curve for the
DFNN-QKHO model scored an impressive 0.99, indicating
excellent performance.
The learning curves for the top four algorithms (ANN, DFNN,
DFNN-KHO, and DFNN-QKHO) are depicted in Fig. 3(c), and
(d) illustrates the learning curves for test accuracy and loss, both
with and without the quantum convolution layer. The confusion
matrix in Fig. 3(e) showcases the performance of the proposed
datasets. The DFNN-QKHO model outperforms the DFNN-
KHO model and other conventional algorithms. Among the
3682 data points analyzed, the DFNN-QKHO model correctly
classiﬁed all cases, with only one misclassiﬁcation. Conversely,
the DFNN-KHO model had 30 misclassiﬁcations.
Overall, the results indicate that the proposed DFNN-QKHO
model yields superior performance compared to other models,
showcasing its potential for accurate prediction in the context of
the Thyroid disease dataset.
3) Analysis of Security for the Blockchain Technique: Data
transmission security is examined. Blockchain will securely
send predicted data to the server. We also implemented RSA
and Difﬁe-Hellman. As shown in Fig. 5, blockchain technol-
ogy achieves 96.25% security while RSA and Difﬁe-Hellman
achieve 87% and 85% for 5 MB data. Data size decreases
Authorized licensed use limited to: Rajshahi University Of Engineering and Technology. Downloaded on April 13,2026 at 18:13:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

3378
IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 28, NO. 6, JUNE 2024
securityrapidly.Blockchaintechnologyachieves98.2%security
for 25 MB data, while RSA and Difﬁe-Hellman achieve 77.5%
and 73.8%.
VI. CONCLUSION
We present an improved deep forward neural network
(DFNN) for healthcare prediction in this study. Krill herd
optimization (KHO) optimizes DFNN weight parameters. We
suggested combining DFNN with Quantum Krill Herd for
greater precision, leading to improved machine learning model
accuracy. Blockchain technology sent forecasted human health
data to the server safely. DFNN-QKHO was compared to other
models in accuracy and F1-score. The proposed QKHO-DFNN
model achieved high accuracy on various datasets. Blockchain
technology improves system security. Point-of-care biosensors
in a public health emergency management network may be
used to manage COVID-19 in the future. Data clouding may
help develop hospital-on-chip (HOC) modules. QML can be
used in intelligent sensor systems by incorporating 2D mate-
rials with IoMT and IoTs to design future sensors technology.
Fig:4 showcases the use of futuristic blockchain technology to
ensure data security in healthcare. Future research aims towards
improving the algorithm’s efﬁciency in the realms of security
and accuracy. The goal is to apply the proposed methodology
within actual healthcare systems, ensuring it is cost-effective
and feasible for real-life implementation. In addition to this,
future investigations will explore the algorithm’s applicability
on different datasets related to various diseases such as tumors
and liver-related conditions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors gratefully acknowledge the support and resources
provided by the Applied Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAI) labora-
tory at the University of Houston Victoria (UHV), through the
generous summer and internal research grants to Dr. Hardik A.
Gohel by the UHV’s Ofﬁce of Research and Sponsored Program
(ORSP).
REFERENCES
[1] F. Chen, P. Deng, J. Wan, D. Zhang, A. V. Vasilakos, and X. Rong, “Data
mining for the Internet of Things: Literature review and challenges,” Int.
J. Distrib. Sensor Netw., vol. 11, no. 8, 2015, Art. no. 431047.
[2] H. Mazumdar et al., “Sequential and comprehensive algorithm for fault
detection in semiconductor sensors,” Appl. Sci., vol. 11, no. 21, 2021,
Art. no. 10419.
[3] T. N. Pham, M.-F. Tsai, D. B. Nguyen, C.-R. Dow, and D.-J. Deng, “A
cloud-based smart-parking system based on Internet-of-Things technolo-
gies,” IEEE Access, vol. 3, pp. 1581–1591, 2015.
[4] T. K. Dash, C. Chakraborty, S. Mahapatra, and G. Panda, “Gradient
boosting machine and efﬁcient combination of features for speech-based
detection of COVID-19,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inform., vol. 26, no. 11,
pp. 5364–5371, Nov. 2022.
[5] J. Amin, M. Sharif, N. Gul, S. Kadry, and C. Chakraborty, “Quantum
machine learning architecture for COVID-19 classiﬁcation based on syn-
thetic data generation using conditional adversarial neural network,” Cogn.
Comput., vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 1677–1688, 2022.
[6] T. Shaown, I. Hasan, M. M. R. Mim, and M. S. Hossain, “IoT-based
portable ECG monitoring system for smart healthcare,” in Proc. 1st Int.
Conf. Adv. Sci., Eng. Robot. Technol., 2019, pp. 1–5.
[7] S. B. Othman, F. A. Almalki, C. Chakraborty, and H. Sakli, “Privacy-
preserving aware data aggregation for IoT-based healthcare with
green computing technologies,” Comput. Elect. Eng., vol. 101, 2022,
Art. no. 108025.
[8] K. Wachira, H. O. Absaloms, and J. M. Mbuthia, “A triumvirate blended
learning method for embedded computational devices used in the Internet
of Things: A case study,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Technol., Inf. Syst.
Elect. Eng., 2017, pp. 495–496.
[9] M. Bhavin, S. Tanwar, N. Sharma, S. Tyagi, and N. Kumar, “Blockchain
and quantum blind signature-based hybrid scheme for healthcare 5.0
applications,” J. Inf. Secur. Appl., vol. 56, 2021, Art. no. 102673.
[10] B. Muthu et al., “Iot based wearable sensor for diseases prediction and
symptom analysis in healthcare sector,” Peer-Peer Netw. Appl., vol. 13,
pp. 2123–2134, 2020.
[11] K. Chung and H. Jung, “Knowledge-based dynamic cluster model for
healthcare management using a convolutional neural network,” Inf. Tech-
nol. Manage., vol. 21, pp. 41–50, 2020.
[12] R. C. V. Balasubramanian and M. Kaliappan, “Development of Big Data
predictive analytics model for disease prediction using machine learning
technique,” J. Med. Syst., vol. 43, pp. 1–8, 2019.
[13] M. A. Kumar, R. Vimala, and Kr Aravind Britto, “A cognitive technol-
ogy based healthcare monitoring system and medical data transmission,”
Measurement, vol. 146, pp. 322–332, 2019.
[14] I. Kerenidis, J. Landman, A. Luongo, and A. Prakash, “q-means: A
quantum algorithm for unsupervised machine learning,” in Proc. Adv.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2019, pp. 4136–4146.
[15] P. Rebentrost, M. Mohseni, and S. Lloyd, “Quantum support vector ma-
chine for Big Data classiﬁcation,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 113, no. 13, 2014,
Art. no. 130503.
[16] A. Deshpande and Krishna K. Warhade, “Hybrid features enabled adaptive
butterﬂy based deep learning approach for human activity recognition,”
in Proc. Mach. Vis. Augmented Intell.–Theory Appl., Springer, 2021,
pp. 341–363.
[17] A. Maheshwari et al., “Data congestion prediction in sensors based IoT
network,” J. Sci. Ind. Res., vol. 80, no. 12, pp. 1091–1095, 2022.
[18] E. Tang, “A quantum-inspired classical algorithm for recommendation
systems,” in Proc. 51st Annu. ACM SIGACT Symp. Theory Comput., 2019,
pp. 217–228.
[19] S. McArdle, X. Yuan, and S. Benjamin, “Error-mitigated digital quantum
simulation,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 122, no. 18, 2019, Art. no. 180501.
[20] W. Huggins, P. Patil, B. Mitchell, K. Birgitta Whaley, and E. Miles
Stoudenmire, “Towards quantum machine learning with tensor networks,”
Quantum Sci. Technol., vol. 4, no. 2, 2019, Art. no. 024001.
[21] X. Tu et al., “Image-to-video generation via 3D facial dynamics,” IEEE
Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 1805–1819,
Apr. 2022.
[22] C. Ciliberto et al., “Quantum machine learning: A classical perspective,”
Proc. Roy. Soc. A, Math. Phys. Eng. Sci., vol. 474, no. 2209, 2018,
Art. no. 20170551.
[23] J. Carolan et al., “Universal linear optics,” Science, vol. 349, no. 6249,
pp. 711–716, 2015.
[24] D. S. Abdelminaam, F. H. Ismail, M. Taha, A. Taha, E. H. Houssein,
and A. Nabil, “CoAID-DEEP: An optimized intelligent framework for
automated detecting COVID-19 misleading information on twitter,” IEEE
Access, vol. 9, pp. 27840–27867, 2021.
[25] M. Kelly, R. Longjohn, and K. Nottingham, “The UCI machine learning
repository,” [Online]. Available: https://archive.ics.uci.edu
Authorized licensed use limited to: Rajshahi University Of Engineering and Technology. Downloaded on April 13,2026 at 18:13:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
